---
layout: post
title:  "Birds Opening"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Birds Opening
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Birds-Opening)
The Bird's Opening is an aggressive flank opening for White. Championed by the English masterHenry Bird, this opening is not popular among the masters of today. However, despite its offbeat quality, the Bird's opening is playable and could be a good surprise weapon for club-level players. The opening also has very little theory, so it can be a good option for players who don't want to study heavy theory.
The Bird's Opening starts after1.f4, when White opens with a flank pawn instead of the more traditional center push of the d- or e-pawns. White's strategy consists of controlling the dark squares on the center of the board. The f-pawn controls the e5-square right away, while a future e2-e3 or c2-c3 push will help White to get a grip of the d4-square.
The downside to White's first move is that the f2-f4 push weakens the a7-g1 diagonal as well as the e1-h4 diagonal. With White usually castling kingside, the open king could be a liability.
There's not much theory behind the Bird's Opening, which is one of the reasons why some players might choose to play it. While it can transpose into other openings like theKing's Gambit, there are still some independent lines. Below you can see the most popular variations of this opening.
The Dutch Variation is the most popular line of the Bird's Opening. It starts after the moves1.f4 d5, which resembles aDutch Defensewith reversed colors. From there, the most popular alternative is for White to eventually play g2-g3 to fianchetto their light-squared bishop to g2.
White can also play e2-e3 instead of g2-g3 in the Dutch Variation. With this setup, White can play a more positional game with an eventual d2-d3 push or go for the Stonewall formation with d2-d4 and c2-c3.
Black may decide to answer the Bird's Opening with the From's Gambit, its most double-edged variation. This line occurs after1.f4 e5when Black offers a pawn for quick development. From there, White can play 2.e4 and enter the King's Gambit or accept the challenge and play 2.fxe5, after which the game gets extremely complicated.
The Bird's Opening came to masters' attention after the English master Henry Bird successfully played it during the second half of the 19th century. Bird demonstrated the opening's attacking potential by defeating strong players of the time, includingEmanuel Lasker,Johannes Zukertort,Louis Paulsen, and more.
Although the opening never caught up in popularity, strong players like GMSavielly Tartakower,Aron Nimzowitsch, and GMBent Larsenplayed it occasionally.
Nowadays, elite players still play the Bird's Opening, even if on rare occasions, including GMsMagnus Carlsen,Hikaru Nakamura,Sergey Karjakin, and more.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bird%27s_Opening)

Bird's Opening(or theDutch Attack) is achess openingcharacterised by the move:
Named after 19th century English playerHenry Bird, Bird's opening is a standardflank opening. White's strategic ideas involve control of the e5-square, offering good attacking chances at the expense of slightly weakening their ownkingside. Black may challenge White's plan to control e5 immediately by playingFrom's Gambit(1...e5); however, the From Gambit is notoriously double-edged and should only be played after significant study.
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingsassigns two codes for Bird's Opening: A02 (1.f4) and A03 (1.f4 d5).
The opening was mentioned byLuis Ramírez de Lucenain his bookRepetición de Amores y Arte de Ajedrez con Cien Juegos de Partido, published c. 1497. In the mid-nineteenth century the opening was sometimes played byLa BourdonnaisandElijah Williams, among others. The British masterHenry Edward Birdfirst played it in 1855 and continued to do so for the next 40 years.[1]In 1885, theHereford Timesnamed it after him.[2]In the first half of the 20th centuryAron NimzowitschandSavielly Tartakowersometimes played 1.f4.[3]In more recent decades,grandmasterswho have used the Bird's with any regularity includeBent Larsen,Andrew Soltis, Lars Karlsson,[4]Mikhail Gurevich, andHenrik Danielsen.[5]
Black's most common response is 1...d5, when the game can take on the character of aDutch Defence(1.d4 f5) with colours reversed. White will then often eitherfianchettotheirking's bishopwith Nf3, g3, Bg2, and 0–0 with a reversed Leningrad Dutch; adopt aStonewall formationwith pawns on d4, e3, and f4 and attempt akingsideattack; or fianchetto theirqueen's bishopto increase their hold on the e5-square. Another strategy, by analogy with the Ilyin–Zhenevsky variation of the Dutch Defence, involves White playing Nf3, e3, Be2, 0-0, d3 and attempting to achieve the break e3–e4 by various means, e.g. Ne5, Bf3, Qe2 and finally e3–e4, or simply Nc3 followed by e4. Timothy Taylor's book on Bird's Opening suggests as a main line: 1.f4 d5 2.Nf3 g6 3.e3 Bg7 4.Be2 Nf6 5.0-0 0-0 6.d3 c5.
White can also play 2.c4, the Mujannah-Sturm gambit. This is a decent opening and seems to borrow ideas from the Réti Opening (1.Nf3 d5 2.c4) and the Queen's Gambit Accepted. Eventually, this move order is followed by Nf3. The best move in this position is 2...d4, where the game continues in the style of the Réti Opening, with 3.Nf3 being a possible next move. 2.c4 is not a true gambit, since if Black tries to hold on to their pawn, they will be punished (2.c4 dxc4 3.e3 b5?[Black should pursue development instead] 4.a4 c6? 5.axb5 cxb5 6.Qf3, where Black must part with aminor piece, akin to the Queen's Gambit Accepted trap).
Black'ssharpestreply is 1...e5!?,From's Gambit, named for the Danish chess playerMartin Severin From(1828–1895). White then has the option totransposeinto theKing's Gambitwith 2.e4. This is an important option which may cause Black to consider playing a different line if they wish to avoid the King's Gambit. It has been observed that one of the possible disadvantages of From's Gambit is that it is very easy for White to avoid.
If White accepts the gambit with 2.fxe5, Black must choose between the main line 2...d6 and the rather obscure 2...Nc6. After 2...Nc6,International Master(IM) Timothy Taylor, in his 2005 book on the Bird's, recommends 3.Nc3!Nxe5 4.d4 intending 5.e4, rather than 3.Nf3?!g5! when Black stands well.[6]After the normal 2...d6 3.exd6 Bxd6, White must play 4.Nf3, avoiding 4.Nc3??Qh4+ 5.g3 Qxg3+ 6.hxg3 Bxg3checkmate. Then Black again has two alternatives: 4...g5 to drive away White's knight, and 4...Nf6, threatening 5...Ng4 and 6...Nxh2! Futureworld championEmanuel Laskerintroduced 4...g5 in the game Bird–Lasker, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1892, so it is known as "Lasker's Variation".[7]Taylor considers 4...g5 dubious; a quiet response that he considers favourable for White is 5.d4 g4 6.Ne5! (6.Ng5?leads to a dubious piece sacrifice) Bxe5 7.dxe5 Qxd1+ 8.Kxd1 Nc6 9.Nc3! Be6 (9...Nxe5?! 10.Bf4 f6 11.Nd5 Kd8 12.Nxf6!) 10.Bf4 0-0-0+ 11.Ke1 Nge7 12.e3 Ng6 13.Bg5 Rdf8 14.Bf6 Rhg8 15.Be2 Ngxe5 16.Rf1 "with the typical edge for White that is characteristic of this variation", according to Taylor.[8]He also considers the sharper 5.g3 g4 6.Nh4 favourable for White, giving as the main line 6...Ne7 7.d4 Ng6 8.Nxg6 hxg6 9.Qd3 Nc6 (9...Rh5 10.Bg2; 9...Na6 10.c3) 10.c3 (10.Nc3? Nxd4! 11.Qxd4?? Bxg3+ wins White's queen) Bf5 (10...Qe7 11.Bg2! Bd7 12.Nd2 0-0-0 13.Ne4! favoured White in Taylor–Becerra Rivero, Minneapolis 2005) 11.e4 Qe7 12.Bg2 0-0-0 13.Be3. According to Taylor, White has a large advantage in all lines, although play remains extremely sharp, e.g. 13...Rde8 14.Nd2; 13...Rxh2 14.Rxh2 Bxg3+ 15.Kd1 Bxh2 16.exf5! Re8 17.fxg6! Qxe3 18.Qxe3 Rxe3 19.gxf7; or 13...Bd7 (threatening 14...Rxh2!) 14.Bf2![9]
Out of the twenty possible opening moves, 1.f4 ranks sixth in popularity inChessgames.com's database, behind1.e4,1.d4,1.Nf3,1.c4, and1.g3.[15]It is less than one-twentieth as popular as the mirror imageEnglish Opening(1.c4).[15]The move 1.f4 slightly weakens White'sking's position.[16]Chessgames.com's statistics indicate that the opening is not an effective way of preserving White'sfirst-move advantage: as of February 2013, out of 3,872 games with 1.f4, White had won 30.7%, drawn 32%, and lost 37.7%, for a total score of 46.7%.[15][17]White scores much better with the more popular 1.e4 (54.25%), 1.d4 (55.95%), 1.Nf3 (55.8%), 1.c4 (56.3%), and 1.g3 (55.8%), as well as with the less popular 1.b3 (52.5%).[15]
According to the similar site 365chess.com, which includes data for lower-level games, as of August 2015, out of 20,010 games with 1.f4, White had won 35.1%, drawn 25%, and lost 39.9%, for a total score of 47.6%.[18]The five more popular openings are still substantially more successful for White: 1.e4 (53.15%), 1.d4 (54.8%), 1.Nf3 (55.4%), 1.c4 (54.65%), and 1.g3 (54.9%).[18]
At lichess.org, in the 1600-2200 rating range in Rapid, Classical, and Correspondence time controls White wins 50% of the time while losing 45% of the time in the 2,600,000 games in their database. In those games the most common responses to 1.f4 are d5 (41%), e6 (11%), c5 (9%), e5 (7%) and Nf6 (7%). Black's most successful response to Bird's Opening in that rating range is e5, where Black's win percentage is 50-46%, but that evens to 48-48% when White plays 2.fxe5.
1.Na3:Durkin1.a3:Anderssen
1.b3:Nimzowitsch-Larsen
1.Nc3:Dunst1.c3:Saragossa
1.d3:Mieses
1.e3:Van 't Kruijs
1.Nf3:Zukertort1.f3:Barnes
1.g3:Benko
1.Nh3:Amar1.h3:Clemenz

---

