---
layout: post
title:  "Scotch Game"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Scotch Game
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Scotch-Game)
The Scotch Game is a centuries-old 1.e4 opening for White and one of the best alternatives to the Ruy Lopez. A good opening for beginners, the Scotch is also an excellent weapon for players of every strength level. One of its most prominent adopters was GMGarry Kasparov. Other elite players like GMsVladimir Kramnik, Levon Aronian, andMagnus Carlsenalso have the Scotch as part of their arsenal.
The Scotch Game begins after the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4. White strikes on the center immediately, forcing Black to give up their central e5-pawn. With this move, White virtually guarantees a space advantage. They also avoid the heavy theory of the Ruy Lopez, which is especially advantageous for beginners.
The downside to White's third move lies in the fact that it releases the central tension too early. White will also need to invest another tempo if they want to recapture the pawn after Black takes on d4.
The Scotch Game doesn't have as much theory as other 1.e4 openings like the Ruy Lopez. However, it's still a good idea for players to familiarize themselves with its most popular variations before playing it.
The Schmidt Variation was GMAnatoly Karpov's main option against the Scotch. It occurs after1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6. From here, the game can take positional or tactical depending on the moves the players choose. In this line, Kasparov introduced the idea of exchanging knights on c6 and following it up with the e4-e5 push, creating an imbalanced and rich position.
The Classical Variation starts after1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Bc5. Black immediately puts pressure on White's central knight, forcing their opponent to invest a tempo to either protect the knight or add another defender to it.
The Scotch Gambit happens after the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 Bc4. White ignores the black pawn on d4 to focus on development. Players who want to try this line must be tactically sharp and prepared to focus on activity rather than material to be successful.
The Goring Gambit is an aggressive option for White in the Scotch Gambit. After the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.c3, White gambits a pawn to quickly develop the b1-knight.
White can even offer a second pawn with1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.c3 dxc3 5.Bc4, entering the Double Pawn Sacrifice Variation. Accepting the second pawn is extremely dangerous for Black. White would develop yet another piece and have serious attacking opportunities against the black king.
The Malaniuk Variation happens after1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Bb4+. Black checks the white king to provoke the c2-c3 push since the alternative 5.Nc3 is not ideal for White. The c3-pawn robs the b1-knight's best developing square, making the white pieces' full and active development harder to achieve.
The Scotch Game is a sound way for White to play a 1.e4 e5 opening and avoid the heavy theory of the Ruy Lopez. Below you can see the best-scoring variations for White in the Scotch Game.
The fifth move introduced by Kasparov in his 1990 match defending the title against Karpov helped to popularize the Scotch again. As explained before, White plays1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nxc6, and after 5...bxc6 White pushes the e-pawn. The resulting position leads to a sharp game, with White winning 36% of games, drawing 33%, and losing 31%.
If Black goes for the Classical Variation, White should respond with1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Bc5 5.Nxc6. White wins 37% of games in this position, draws 38%, and loses 25%. After the knight capture, Black can go for 6...bxc6 or the Intermezzo Variation with 6...Qf6, both of which are fine for White.
If you're an attacking player who doesn't mind playing down in material, the Goring Gambit can be an exciting option for you. After1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.c3White wins 44% of games, draws 26%, and loses 32%. Although not common in master-level play, this variation scores very well among club players.

When facing the Scotch, Black must take the d-pawn on the third move. After that, Black has a few reliable options to choose from. Below you can see the best-scoring lines for Black.
The Malaniuk Variation is one of the less-explored but highest-scoring lines for Black. After1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Bb4+Black wins 34% of games, draws 32%, and loses 34%. This line is even more successful among amateurs, with Black outscoring White.

If White goes for the Scotch Gambit, Black's most successful line is the Dubois Réti Defense, which occurs after1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Bc4 Nf6. Black wins 37% in this line, draws 31%, and loses 33%, outscoring White. Amateurs share the same success in this variation, winning more often than losing.
Against the ambitious White player who goes for the Goring Gambit, Black can simply decline the pawn and play1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.c3 d5. Black wins 32%, draws 32%, and loses 36% of games in this line.
The Scotch Game was recorded for the first time by the Italian chess master Ercole del Rio in his 1750 treatise "On the game of Chess, practical Observations by an anonymous Modenese Author." However, the opening got his name for the famous 1824 match between the chess clubs of London and Edinburgh. Three of the games featured the opening, with the Scots winning two of them and drawing the other.
The opening enjoyed vast popularity during the 19th century but fell in decline during the 20th century, as many players considered it lacked strategical depth. However, Kasparov revived the Scotch after playing it in three consecutive World Championship matches in 1990, 1993, and 1995. Today, elite players make use of this opening regularly, including Carlsen.
City of Edinburgh vs. London Chess Club, 1824
Siegbert Tarrasch vs. Berthold Lasker, 1882
Garry Kasparov vs. Anatoly Karpov, 1990
Wesley So vs. Magnus Carlsen, 2017
You now know what the Scotch Game is, how to play it, its best-scoring lines for White and Black, and more! Head over to ourMaster Gamespage to study the opening and learn even more about it.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scotch_Game)
TheScotch Game, orScotch Opening, is achess openingthat begins with the moves:
Ercole del Rio, in his 1750treatiseSopra il giuoco degli Scacchi, Osservazioni pratiche d’anonimo Autore Modenese("On the game of Chess, practical Observations by an anonymous Modenese Author"), was the first author to mention what is now called the Scotch Game.[1]The opening received its name from acorrespondencematch in 1824 betweenEdinburghandLondon. Popular in the 19th century, by 1900 the Scotch had lost favour among top players because it was thought to release the central tension too early and allow Black toequalisewithout difficulty. In the 20th centurygrandmastersGarry KasparovandJan Timmanhelped to re-popularise the Scotch when they used it as a surprise weapon to avoid the well-analysedRuy Lopez.
White aims to dominate thecentreby exchanging their d-pawn for Black's e-pawn. Black usually plays 3...exd4, as they have no good way of maintaining their pawn on e5 (this same position can be reached bytranspositionfrom the Centre Game 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Nf3 Nc6). After 3...d6, White is better after 4.dxe5 dxe5 5.Qxd8+ Kxd8 6.Bc4, or they may simply play 4.Bb5, when 4...exd4 5.Nxd4 Bd7 transposes to theSteinitz Defencein the Ruy Lopez.
3...Nxd4 theLolli Variationis possible, though rarely played today by strong players. It was popular in the 19th century, and receives five columns of analysis in Freeborough and Ranken's opening manualChess Openings Ancient and Modern(3rd ed. 1896 p. 53). It is often described today as a strategic error, since after 4.Nxd4 exd4 5.Qxd4 (5.Bc4 is theNapoleon Gambit) White'squeenstands on a central square, and isnotdeveloped too early since it cannot be chased away very effectively (5...c5?is a seriously weakening move that blocks Black'sking's bishop). Nonetheless, theEncyclopaedia of Chess Openings(ECO) concludes that Blackequaliseswith 5...Ne7 6.Bc4 Nc6 7.Qd5 Qf6 8.0-0 Ne5 9.Be2 c6 10.Qb3 Ng6 11.f4 Bc5+ 12.Kh1 d6 (I. Sokolov).[2]Similarly, Harald Keilhack concludes inKnight on the Left: 1.Nc3(p. 21) that although ...Nxd4 is a "non-line" these days, if Black continues perfectly it is not clear that White gets even a small advantage. Keilhack analyses 5.Qxd4 d6 6.Nc3 Nf6 7.Bc4 Be7 8.0-0 0-0 9.Bg5 c6 10.a4 Qa5 11.Bh4 and now after 11...Qe5 or 11...Be6, "White has at most this indescribable nothingness which is theadvantage of the first move." (Id.p. 25) TheECOalso concludes that Black equalises after the alternative 4.Nxe5 Ne6 5.Bc4 Nf6 6.Nc3 Be7 7.0-0 0-0 8.Be3 d6 9.Nd3 Nxe4 10.Nxe4 d5 (Parma).[3]The main line 3...exd4 4.Nxd4 may transpose into this position if Black chooses to play 4...Nxd4.
3...d6?is often regarded as a mistake and an automatic slight advantage for White. While 3...d6 does defend the e5-pawn, it allows White to play 4.d5 and kick out the knight. The resulting line of 4...Nce7 5.c4 Nf6 6.Nc3 Ng6 allows White an imposing centre and better chances for winning. Opting to take on e5 still scores poorly for Black, as 4.dxe5 dxe5 5.Qxd8+ leaves Black in a losing dilemma: either take with the king and forgo castling rights (5...Kxd8), or to take with the c6-knight and lose the e5-pawn (5...Nxd8 6.Nxe5).Chess.comcites a meager 18% win rate for Black's 3...d6 move.
3...f5?!4.Nxe5 transposes into a line of the dubiousLatvian Gambit.
After the usual 3...exd4, White can respond with the main line 4.Nxd4 or can play agambitby offering Black one or two pawns in exchange for rapiddevelopment.
After 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4, the most important continuations are:
In the main line after 4.Nxd4, Black has two major options. Either 4...Bc5 or 4...Nf6 offers Black good chances for an equal game.
After 4...Bc5 White has 5.Be3, 5.Nxc6, or 5.Nb3.
On 5.Be3 play almost always continues 5...Qf6 6.c3 Nge7 7.Bc4 (as proposed byIMGary LaneinWinning with the Scotch; several seventh move alternatives for White are possible here, 7.g3 for example) 7...Ne5 seems Black's strongest reply. Play usually continues 8.Be2 (white allows Ne5 with tempo to enable a potential f4 counter). 8... Qg6 (8...d5 is also possible) 9.0-0. Here, White allows Black the option of taking the unprotected pawn on e4, but it is considered "poisoned".[4]) 8.0-0 Bb6 where the position is roughly equal.
After 5.Nxc6, play almost always continues 5...Qf6 (Black does not lose a piece on c6 because he is threatening mate with 6...Qxf2) 6.Qd2 dxc6 7.Nc3, or 6.Qf3 dxc6 followed by either 7.Bc4 or 7.Nc3.
On 5.Nb3 play almost always continues 5...Bb6 6.Nc3, or alternatively 5...Bb6 6. a4 a6 7.Nc3. After 6.Nc3, White usually follows with (in some order) Qe2, Be3 or Bg5.
After 4...Nf6 White has 5.Nxc6 (theMieses Variation) or 5.Nc3 (theScotch Four Knights Game). After 5.Nc3 almost always played is 5...Bb4 6.Nxc6 bxc6 7.Bd3 d5 8.exd5 cxd5 9.0-0 0-0 10.Bg5 c6. After 5.Nxc6 bxc6 6.e5 Qe7 7.Qe2 Nd5 8.c4 is also very common. Where these main lines end, the first real opening decisions are made, which are too specific for this overview.
Steinitz's4...Qh4!? almost wins a pawn by force, but White gets a lead in development and attacking chances as compensation. As of 2005, White's most successful line has been 5.Nc3 Bb4 6.Be2 Qxe4 7.Nb5 Bxc3+ 8.bxc3 Kd8 9.0-0, from which Black's awkwardly placed king has generally proven more significant than the extra pawn.
Instead of 4.Nxd4, White has two ways to offer a gambit. TheScotch Gambitstarts with 4.Bc4. The Scotch Gambit may also be reached via theItalian Gambitby 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.d4 exd4; however, this move order gives Black the option of avoiding the Scotch with 4...Bxd4. After 4.Bc4, Black can transpose into the 4.d4 exd4 line of theTwo Knights Defencewith 4...Nf6, or continue 4...Bc5, when White has three main options.
The Black response 4...Bb4+ to the Scotch Gambit is called the London Defence.[8]
TheGöring Gambitis a relative of theDanish Gambitwhich starts with 4.c3. White sacrifices one or two pawns in return for a lead in development, and typically follows up by putting pressure on f7 with Bc4, Qb3 and sometimes Ng5, while Nc3–d5 is another common motif. TheOxford Companion to Chessnotes that the gambit was first played at high levels byHoward Stauntonin the 1840s, and the earliest game with it was probably played in 1843.[9]The first game with the gambit accepted may be Meek–Morphy, New York 1857.[10]Carl Theodor Göringintroduced it into master play in 1872, but while Göring's name is most often associated with the one-pawn gambit (5.Nxc3), Göring invariably used the double-pawn gambit with 5.Bc4. The gambit has been played byLjubomir Ljubojević,David Bronstein,Frank Marshall, andJonathan Penrose. In casual games,Alexander Alekhineoften transposed to it via the move order 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.c3 dxc3 4.Nxc3, when ...Nc6 for Black and Nf3 for White often followed. In general, the opening is unpopular at master level but is more popular at club level. It is recommended to study the Göring Gambit in connection with the Danish.
Black can equalise by transposing to the Danish Declined with 4...d5, when the critical line runs 5.exd5 Qxd5 6.cxd4 Bg4 7.Be2 Bb4+ 8.Nc3 Bxf3 9.Bxf3 Qc4 (or 6...Bb4+ 7.Nc3 Bg4 8.Be2 Bxf3 9.Bxf3 Qc4, leading to the same position), often referred to as the Capablanca Variation in view of the strength of Black's concept in the game Marshall–Capablanca, Lake Hopatcong 1926.[11]This line (which can also arise from theChigorin Defenceto the Queen's Gambit),[12]forcing White to either exchange queens or forgo the right tocastlewith the risky 10.Be3, deters many players from employing this gambit. Equal endgames result after either 10.Qb3 Qxb3 11.axb3 Nge7 or 10.Bxc6+ bxc6 11.Qe2+ Qxe2+ 12.Kxe2 Ne7. If Black avoids steering for Capablanca's ending, e.g. with 6...Nf6 or 7...0-0-0 in the above lines, then White obtains good piece play in return for the isolated d-pawn. White can deviate with 6...Bg4 7.Nc3, with the idea of meeting 7...Bb4 with 8.a3 (or 6...Bb4+ 7.Nc3 Bg4 8.a3)[13]or the rare 5.Bd3,[14]neither of which promise an advantage but which avoid those endings.
Black can also decline with 4...Nf6, transposing to a line of thePonziani Opening. The continuation 5.e5 Ne4 was endorsed byDangerous Weapons, 1.e4 e5(Everyman Chess, 2008), butTim Hardingconsiders 5...Nd5 a better try for equality,[15]when White can continue 6.Bb5 a6 7.Ba4 Nb6 8.Bb3, 6.Qb3, 6.Bc4 or 6.cxd4. Another possibility is 4...Nge7 intending 5...d5, when the critical continuation is 5.Bc4 d5 6.exd5 Nxd5 7.0-0. According to IMJohn Watson, Black may be able to equalise with 7...Be7.[16]Declining with 4...d3, however, allows White some advantage after 5.Bxd3 d6 6.Bf4 Be7 7.h3 Nf6 8.Nbd2 Bd7 9.Qc2 according toBatsford Chess Openings 2.
If Black accepts the gambit with 4...dxc3, White can commit to sacrificing only one pawn with 5.Nxc3. Black's most critical response is generally considered to be 5...Bb4,[17]when White does not get enough compensation after 6.Bc4 d6 7.0-0 Bxc3 8.bxc3 Nf6!, when 9.Ba3 Bg4 is insufficient and 9.e5 Nxe5 10.Nxe5 dxe5 11.Qb3 (11.Qxd8+ Kxd8 12.Bxf7 Ke7 is also good for Black) 11...Qe7 12.Ba3 c5 does not give enough compensation for two pawns. White can deviate with 7.Qb3, when the old main line runs 7...Qe7 8.0-0 Bxc3, and here 9.Qxc3 gives White good compensation. Thus both John Watson and USCF master Mark Morss recommend 7...Bxc3+, in order to meet 8.Qxc3 with 8...Qf6! when White loses too much time with the queen. Thus White often continues 8.bxc3 when 8...Qe7 9.0-0 Nf6 can be met by 10.e5 (transposing back to lines arising from 7.0-0 Bxc3 8.bxc3 Nf6 9.e5, though these are insufficient for White) or the relatively unexplored 10.Bg5. Other deviations for White include 7.Ng5 and 6.Bg5.[18]
Black's main alternative is 5...d6, which usually leads to complications and approximately equal chances after 6.Bc4 Nf6 7.Qb3 Qd7 8.Ng5 Ne5 9.Bb5 c6 10.f4, or 7.Ng5 Ne5 8.Bb3 h6 9.f4. 5...Bc5 is also playable, transposing to the Scotch Gambit after 6.Bc4 but cutting out the Bxf7+ possibility. 5...Nf6 6.Bc4 can transpose back to 5...d6 lines after 6...d6, or Black can attempt to transpose to 5...Bb4 lines with 6...Bb4, but this allows 7.e5 d5 8.exf6 dxc4 9.Qxd8+ Nxd8 10.fxg7 Rg8 11.Bh6.
Alternatively, White can transpose into the Danish by offering a second pawn with 5.Bc4 cxb2 6.Bxb2, an approach whichJohn Emmsconsiders far more dangerous for Black. If Black does not accept the second pawn with 5...cxb2, then White can avoid Black's most critical response to 5.Nxc3 (5...Bb4 6.Bc4 d6). For instance, after 5...d6, White's best is 6.Nxc3, transposing back to the 5.Nxc3 d6 line. 5...Nf6 6.Nxc3 transposes to the 5.Nxc3 Nf6 line, 5...Bb4 is well met by 6.0-0 or 6.bxc3 (transposing to the Scotch Gambit), 5...Bc5 also transposes to the Scotch Gambit while 5...Be7?! (which is well met by 6.Qd5) transposes to theHungarian Defence.
Thus Black's most critical response is to take the second pawn with 5...cxb2 6.Bxb2. Unlike in the Danish proper, having committed thequeen's knightto c6, Black cannot safely meet 6.Bxb2 with 6...d5.[19]Instead, play often continues 6...d6 7.0-0 Be6 8.Bxe6 fxe6 9.Qb3 Qd7 or 7.Qb3 Qd7 8.Bc3 Nh6. 6...Bb4+ is the main alternative for Black, whereupon an approach withqueensidecastling is considered dangerous for Black, e.g. 7.Nc3 Nf6 8.Qc2 d6 9.0-0-0.
Bibliography

---

