---
layout: post
title:  "Larsens Opening"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Larsens Opening
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Nimzowitsch-Larsen-Attack)
The opening move 1.b3 is a quite playable way for White to begin a game. It is named for the great Danish GMBent Larsen, who was known for his offbeat style. It is sometimes also known as the Nimzowitsch-Larsen or Nimzo-Larsen Attack after Larsen and the Latvian-Danish GMAron Nimzowitsch.
Like most openings that do not begin with 1.e4 or 1.d4, Larsen's Opening is immediately identifiable from White's first move. It is the sixth-most popular opening move for White in theChess.com Masters databaseafter 1.e4, 1.d4, 1.c4, 1.Nf3, and 1.g3.
Although White immediately steers the game in a specific direction with Larsen's Opening, Black has several reasonable ways of meeting it. The three most popular first moves for Black are 1...e5, 1...d5, and 1...Nf6.
The first of those moves is most popular, even though White's usual second move, the natural 2. Bb2, attacks that pawn. Fortunately for Black, it's very easy to defend naturally with either 2...d6 or 2...Nc6, both of which aid development as well.
The most popular second move after 1...d5 is 2...Nf6, and the most popular second move after 1...Nf6 is 2...d5. In either order, Black does not give White a pawn to attack. White is usually playing Bb2 and Nf3 in some order on moves two and three.
As with any chess position, the potential tree of moves quickly explodes. White usually plays the opening as part of a broader system that also includes the pawn moves c4 and e3. Black is looking to develop naturally and get a playable game.
Black doesn't problems after 1...e5 or 1...d5. If you open with 1.e4 as White, then it's easiest to play 1...e5 as Black here, and if you're more of a 1.d4 player, try 1...d5. There's no reason to get fancy.
No matter what variation Black might play against 1. b3, the idea is much the same. White is trying to control the center from the flank and Black's main responses are to occupy it with at least one pawn.
The earliest record of 1. b3 in a serious game came all the way back in 1851 when it was played by the Dutchman Maarten van't Kruijs. However, it was Nimzowitsch who first became identified with the opening. He played it three times from 1927-29 and won, drew, and lost once each. It remained a quite rare opening up until the mid-1960s when GM Vladimir Simagin began playing it occasionally.
Finally, in 1968, Larsen played it for the first of dozens of times, beginning at a tournament in Monte Carlo. Larsen came away the victor at the tournament with a 9.5/13 score, although he drew both games he played the opening in. GM Bobby Fischer picked up on it and had success in 1970, defeating GM Miroslav Filip and GMHenrique Meckingwith it at the Palma de Mallorca Interzonal.
Amusingly, when Fischer and Larsen played each other in the 1971 Candidates, the opening did not arise. Fischer never actually played the opening again, although Larsen continued to do so. Larsen's Opening remains a respectable option for White to this day, especially if wanting to avoid main lines following 1.e4, 1.d4, or the English. Top bullet players like Nakamura, Carlsen, and Nepomniachtchi still play it in blitz and bullet.
Perhaps the best-known win for White in the Larsen Opening was instead played by Fischer in his matchup against Mecking in the 1970 Interzonal. Fischer also defeated GMUlf Anderssonand GM Vladimir Tukmakov with the opening at other events in 1970.
However, by far the most famous game with 1.b3 was a win for Black. Larsen himself played 1.b3 in the game, but unfortunately for him, it was a 17-move brilliancy for his opponent GMBoris Spassky. Spassky played for rapid development and was rewarded with a quickly winning position that included a spectacular 14th move.
If you're looking for an unusual opening that is still quite good, consider trying the Larsen Opening. Learn more about this opening byclicking hereor studying Larsen's games withthis Chess.com lesson.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nimzowitsch-Larsen_Attack)
TheNimzowitsch-Larsen Attack(also known as theNimzo-Larsen Attack,Larsen's OpeningandQueen's Fianchetto Opening) is achess openingtypically starting with the move: 1.b3but sometimes introduced by themove order1.Nf3 and then 2.b3. Theflank openingmove 1.b3 prepares tofianchettothequeen's bishopwhere it will help control thecentral squaresinhypermodernfashion and put pressure on Black'skingside.
Lines are classified under codes A01–A06 in theEncyclopaedia of Chess Openings.
The earliest master-level exponent of the Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack was the strong English amateurJohn Owen, who occasionally opened this way in the 1870s – essentially playingOwen's Defence, 1.e4 b6, with a move in hand.
In the 1920s and 30s,Aron Nimzowitschexperimented with 1.b3 but more commonly employed the move order 1.Nf3 d5 2.b3, usually reaching positions akin to areversedNimzo-Indian Defence (e.g. after 2...Nf6 3.Bb2 c5 4.e3 Nc6 5.Bb5).
Danishgrandmaster(GM)Bent Larsenplayed 1.b3 frequently between 1968 and 1972, but the opening suffered a setback in the 1970USSR vs. Rest of the Worldmatch inBelgrade, where Larsen played it against reigningworld championBoris Spasskyand lost in 17 moves.[2]
The Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack received interest fromBobby Fischer, who employed 1.b3 on five occasions in 1970. A notable longer-term exponent of the opening, however, was Soviet GMVladimir Bagirovwho played 1.b3 on around 100 occasions between 1976 and 2000 with considerable success (scoring approximately 54% wins and 38% draws). Recent specialists in this opening have included Czech GMPavel Blatnyand Armenian GMArtashes Minasian. The Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack is sometimes used as a surprise weapon in super-GM-level online blitz tournaments, including byHikaru Nakamura,Magnus Carlsen,Richárd Rapport,Ian Nepomniachtchi,Vladislav ArtemievandBaadur Jobava.
If Black responds to 1.b3 with 1...e5, White has essentially two options, to allow or prevent ...d5. The main choice has been to proceed in truehypermodernstyle, allowing Black to form a classical e5/d5pawn centrethat White will then undermine. For example: 1.b3 e5 2.Bb2 Nc6 3.e3 d5 4.Bb5 (threatening Bxc6+ and Bxe5) 4...Bd6 5.f4 (further attacking the e5-pawn, which cannot take due to  Bxg7 winning the h8-rook) and now 5...Qe7 or 5...f6 (in either case defending the pawn again). This type of line is very much in the spirit ofOwen'soriginal conception of the opening.
The alternative for White has been to contest the d5-square, rather in the style of a reversedSicilian Defence, i.e.: 1.b3 e5 2.Bb2 Nc6 3.c4 (see diagram). In this case Black can proceed either as per the Open Sicilian (e.g. 3...Nf6 4.e3 d5 5.cxd5 Nxd5) or as per the Closed Sicilian (e.g. 3...g6 4.e3 Bg7 5.Nf3 with ...f5 and/or ...Nf6 to follow).
After 3.c4, the opening could be said to havetransposedto anEnglish Opening(1.c4), but these lines occur almost exclusively via a 1.b3 move order. In this variation, White argues that since the Sicilian Defence (1.e4 c5) is one of the very best responses to 1.e4, acquiring a Sicilian Defence position with an extra move must be superior. In the Sicilian Defence, however, Black rarely plays b6/Bb7, and when aqueensidefianchetto is played it is usually in extended form (e.g. a6/b5/Bb7). Play after 1.b3 e5 2.Bb2 Nc6 3.c4 Nf6 4.e3 d5 5.cxd5 Nxd5 is likely to resemble a quietHedgehog-type line from the Paulsen Sicilian.
Returning to Black's first move, if Black responds to 1.b3 with 1...d5 then White again has two options, whether to prevent or allow ...e5. If ...e5 is allowed then transposition will likely occur to the lines given above after 1...e5. If White chooses to prevent ...e5, for example with 2.Bb2 c5 3.e3 Nc6 4.Nf3, then play often takes the form of a reversedNimzo-Indian Defenceafter 4...Nf6 5.Bb5 (diagram). This type of position often arises from a 1.Nf3 move order (e.g. 1.Nf3 d5 2.b3 etc.) and demonstrates Nimzowitsch's interpretation of the opening.
The Nimzo-Indian Defence is a popular defence to 1.d4, and in this case White has obtained a version withcolours reversedand an extratempo.
The notes above give the three typical branches of the Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack: (1) playing against an e5/d5 centre, (2) allowing ...e5 but contesting ...d5 and (3) playing against a d5/c5 centre. Alternative first moves for Black (such as 1...Nf6, 1...c5 and 1...e6) are likely to transpose to either the e5/d5 or d5/c5 lines already considered. Other Black structures give White more freedom in handling the opening. For example, if Black opts for 1.b3 e5 2.Bb2 d6, then White can proceed with either (a) e3 and Ne2 and then contest the Black centre with d4 or f4, depending on how Black continues, or (b) c4, interpreting the opening as a reversed Closed Sicilian or as a type of English Opening.
One independent option available to Black is to play a reversed kind ofLondon Systemwith d5, Bf5, Nf6, e6, c6, etc. In this case White may change tack and play adouble fianchetto, forcing through e2–e4 (via d3, Nd2 and Bg2) and disrupting Black's soliddevelopment. For example, 1.b3 d5 2.Bb2 Bf5 3.d3 e6 4.Nd2 Nf6 5.g3 Be7 6.Bg2 h6 7.e4 Bh7 reaches a form ofHippopotamus structure.
The issue of whether to play the Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack via a 1.b3 move order or a 1.Nf3/2.b3 move order is ultimately a matter of taste. The 1.Nf3 move order could be argued to limit the number of variations at Black's disposal and to channel the play towards those where White scores more highly. The 1.b3 move order, on the other hand, gives more variety and more scope for tricks and traps on the a1–h8 diagonal. It is also more likely to result in positions with which Black is unfamiliar. For example, after 1.Nf3 d5 2.b3, any Black players who open 1.d4 with White will be likely to have some awareness of the strategic considerations required to play a reversed Nimzo-Indian position. After 1.b3 e5 2.Bb2, however, Black is unlikely to have had much experience facing comparable positions as White in the rather rareOwen's Defence, and in this case has colours reversed and is a move down. While many of the 1.b3 lines are rated onlyequalby theory, the 1.b3 player will thus often enjoy an advantage in practical terms, especially at shortertime controls.
Jacobs & Tait[3]note that the 1.b3 move order has the added advantage that in most lines White has a greater range of options available because f4 is still playable. This is particularly relevant when compared to lines such as 1.Nf3 d6 2.b3 or 1.Nf3 Nc6 2.b3 where Black is able to play 2...e5, transposing to lines where White may have preferred to have had the option to attack e5 with both f4 and Nf3. Jacobs & Tait also note that a 1.Nf3 move order allows Black to play 1...g6, preventing White from following up with 2.b3.
1.Na3:Durkin1.a3:Anderssen
1.b3:Nimzowitsch-Larsen
1.Nc3:Dunst1.c3:Saragossa
1.d3:Mieses
1.e3:Van 't Kruijs
1.Nf3:Zukertort1.f3:Barnes
1.g3:Benko
1.Nh3:Amar1.h3:Clemenz

---

