---
layout: post
title:  "Vienna Game"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Vienna Game
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Vienna-Game)
The Vienna Game is a 1.e4 opening for White. Compared to other 1.e4 openings, the Vienna is much less common but theoretically sound. Because of this, it can be an excellent weapon for beginners to catch their opponents by surprise. The Vienna is also suitable for more experienced players, with GMs likeViswanathan Anandand Alexander Shabalov among the players who have played it.
TheVienna Gamestarts after the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nc3. Instead of the more common 2.Nf3, White chooses to develop the queenside knight. White's second move allows for a quick f2-f4 pawn-push. It also keeps the d1-h5 diagonal open for the queen, which can go to f3 or h5.
The Vienna Game is not as common or as old as other 1.e4 openings. For this reason, it is also not heavy in theory. Black has three main responses to the Vienna on their second move: 3...Nf6, 3...Nc6, and 3...Bc5.
Black's most popular response to the Vienna game is the Falkbeer Variation, which starts after1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6. Black develops a knight and puts pressure on the white e4-pawn. Black's last move also helps them play the d7-d5 push if White plays the Vienna Gambit (discussed shortly).
From this position, White can opt for an aggressive or a positional approach.
The Mieses Variation is the most popular line of the Falkbeer. This variation starts after1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.g3, when White goes for a more positional game. White intends to fianchetto their light-squared bishop on g2 to increase their control over the central d5- and e4-squares. Black mostly goes for the immediate central counterstrike with d7-d5 but can also play a slower game by developing their pieces.
Another popular way for White to continue in the Falkbeer Variation is with the Vienna Gambit. After the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.f4, White immediately challenges Black's central control. The Vienna Gambit resembles the King's Gambit, with the added benefit that Black no longer has easy access to White's weakened e1-h4 diagonal due to the f6-knight.
White usually develops their light-squared bishop on c4 or b5, their knight to f3, and castles kingside. Usually, White will use the semi-open f-file and active pieces to attack the kingside.
Although not as common among grandmasters anymore, the Vienna Gambit is still a good weapon for club-level players.
The Max Lange Defense starts after the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6. Black follows White's lead and develops the queenside knight, supporting their e5-pawn. The game can then transpose to the Three Knights Opening if White plays 3.Nf3. White can also stay in the Vienna by developing their light-squared bishop on b5, c4, or g2.
Black can also enter the Anderssen Defense with the moves1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Bc5. Black makes a useful developing move, bringing their kingside bishop into the game. Although not nearly as popular as the other variations, this is still a sound way of playing with Black against the Vienna. Former world championJose Raul Capablancaused to play this variation to avoid theory.
The Vienna Game is relatively new when compared to other openings. Even though there are records of games with this opening as early as 1846, it didn't catch up in popularity until the beginning of the 1900s. Masters based in Vienna, Austria, were among its leading proponents—Wilhelm Steinitz,Rudolf Spielmann, andSavielly Tartakower.
The opening remained relatively popular until the end of the 1920s when its usage started declining. By the end of the 1930s, few masters still played the Vienna regularly, and from that moment on, the opening rarely appeared at the elite level play.
Today, the opening is still common at the club level, but not so much among masters. However, you can still see grandmasters playing this opening sporadically.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vienna_Game)
TheVienna Gameis anopeninginchessthat begins with the moves:
White's second move is less common than 2.Nf3, and is also more recent.
The original idea behind the Vienna Game was to play a delayedKing's Gambitwith f4 (the Vienna Gambit), but in modern play White often plays morequietly(for example, byfianchettoinghis king's bishop with g3 and Bg2). Black most often continues with2...Nf6. The opening can also lead to theFrankenstein–Dracula Variation.
Weaver W. Adamsfamously claimed that the Vienna Game led to aforced winfor White.[1]Nick de Firmianconcludes in the 15th edition ofModern Chess Openings, however, that the opening leads toequalitywithbest playby both sides.[2]
White has three main options: 3.f4, 3.Bc4, and 3.g3. Note that 3.Nf3transposesto thePetrov'sThree Knights Game, which after 3...Nc6 leads to theFour Knights Game.
Atgrandmasterlevel, the gambit move 3.f4 is considered too risky an opening.[3]It is best met by 3...d5, striking back in the center. The variation 4.fxe5 Nxe4 5.Qf3 has been popularised by the International Master and chess streamerLevy Rozmanbut this variation is well met by 5...Nc6, with the point 6.Nxe4 Nd4. Also possible is 5.d3, but the normal continuation is 5.Nf3. White obtains open lines and attacking chances, but Black can usually hold the balance with correct play.
Lines other than 3...d5 give White at least an edge, however, making this a good choice for aggressive play at lower levels, where opponents are unlikely to know that 3...d5 is best.
The gambit should not be accepted, since 3...exf4 4.e5 Qe7 5.Qe2 forces Black's knight to retreat with 5...Ng8, and after 6.Nf3, Black must be careful not to lose on the spot, for example after 6...d6? 7.Nd5!, when the dual ideas of Nxc7 and exd6 will win the game quickly. Retreating immediately with 4...Ng8 is better, but after 5.Nf3 with the idea of d4 followed by Bxf4, White has a nice game.
Other lines for Black include 3...d6 4.Nf3 Nc6 5.Bb5 Bd7 6.d3, when the threat of Bxc6 followed by taking on e5 induces 6...exf4 7.Bxf4, leaving White with a pleasant position; and also 3...Nc6? 4.fxe5! Nxe5 5.d4, when both 5...Nc6 and 5...Ng6 are met by 6.e5 with a winning advantage to White. Material is not as important as the attack in this position, so White should not be afraid to sacrifice.
The move 3.Bc4 leads to a position which can also be reached from theBishop's Opening(1.e4 e5 2.Bc4). Black has several choices here; 3...Bc5 can transpose to theKing's Gambit Declinedafter 4.d3 d6 5.f4 Nc6 6.Nf3; 3...Nc6 4.d3, 4...Na5, 4...Bc5 or 4...d6 are all playable; 3...Bb4 4.f4 Nxe4 5.Qh5 0-0 leads to wild but probably equal play, according to de Firmian inMCO-15.[4]
3...Nxe4, 4.Qh5 (threatening Qxf7#) 4...Nd6 5.Bb3 when Black can either go for the relatively quiet waters of 5...Be7 6.Nf3 Nc6 7.Nxe5 g6 8.Qe2 (or 8.Nxc6 dxc6 9.Qe5 0-0) Nd4 9.Qd3 Nxb3 10.axb3 Nf5 11.0-0 d6, which led to equality inAnand–Ivanchuk,Roquebrune1992.[5]Or the complexities of 5...Nc6 6.Nb5 g6 7.Qf3 f5 8.Qd5 Qe7 9.Nxc7+ Kd8 10.Nxa8 b6, which the Irish correspondence chess player and theoristTim Hardingextravagantly dubbed "theFrankenstein–Dracula Variation".[6]4.Nxe4 d5forksbishop and knight is fine for Black.[5]4.Bxf7+ is weak; after 4...Kxf7 5.Nxe4 d5!(inferior is 5...Nc6 6.Qf3+, when Black cannot play 6...Kg8??because of 7.Ng5!1–0Davids–Diggle, London Banks League 1949, while 6...Ke8 leaves the king awkwardly placed in the center)[7][8]6.Qf3+ (6.Qh5+ g6 7.Qxe5?Bh6! wins for Black)[9]Kg8 7.Ng5!?(hoping for 7...Qxg5?? 8.Qxd5+ andmatenext move, Schottlaender–Ed. Lasker, simultaneous exhibition, Breslau c. 1902) Qd7!, with a large advantage for Black in view of hisbishop pairand pawn center.[10][11]
The move 3.g3, the Mieses Variation, is a quiet continuation in which White fianchettoes his king's bishop, a line played byVasily Smyslovon a few occasions, most notably in a win overLev Polugaevskyin the 1961 USSR Championship. That game continued 3...d5 4.exd5 Nxd5 5.Bg2 Be6 6.Nf3 Nc6 7.0-0 Be7 8.Re1 Bf6 9.Ne4 0-0 10.d3 Be7 11.a3 Nb6 12.b4, resulting in a position which theEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingsassesses as slightly better for White. The main line today, however, is considered to be 5...Nxc3 6.bxc3 Bd6 7.Nf3 0-0 8.0-0. A major alternative for Black is 3...Bc5 (3...Nc6 normally transposes into one of the other lines).
In addition to these lines, the late AmericanmasterAriel Mengarini advocated the whimsical 3.a3, sometimes called Mengarini's Opening. It is not a serious try for advantage, but is essentially a useful waiting move that gives White an improved version of Black's position after 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6. First, the "ReversedRuy Lopez" with 3...Bb4 is ruled out. Second, after 3...d5, 4.exd5 Nxd5 5.Qh5!? gives White an improved version of theSteinitzVariation of theScotch Game, since Black can never play ...Nb4, an important idea for White in the mirror-image position. Third, after 3...Bc5, 4.Nf3 gives a reversedTwo Knights Defense. Then the typical 4...Ng4 may be met by 5.d4 exd4 6.Na4, when 6...Bb4+, White's usual move in the mirror-image position, is impossible. After 4...Ng4, White may also play improved versions of the Ulvestad Variation (6.b4 in the above line) and Fritz Variation (6.Nd5 c6 7.b4), since when White plays b4 his pawn is protected, unlike in the mirror-image position. If Black plays more quietly with 3...Bc5 4.Nf3 Nc6, then 5.Nxe5! Nxe5 6.d4 gives White some advantage. The best line for Black may be 3...Bc5 4.Nf3 d5 5.exd5 0-0 (better than 5...e4 6.d4, when the normal 6...Bb4 is impossible), and if 6.Nxe5, 6...Re8 7.d4 Bxd4! 8.Qxd4 Nc6, as in the mirror-image line. Also possible is 3...Bc5 4.Nf3 d6, when Black stands well after 5.Bc4 Be6, while 5.d4 cxd4 6.Nxd4 gives White little or no advantage.
White again has three main options, 3.Bc4, 3.f4, and 3.g3. Note that 3.Nf3 transposes to theThree Knights Game, which after 3...Nf6 leads to theFour Knights Game.
In the Vienna Gambit, defined by the moves 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.f4, White sacrifices a pawn to gaincontrol of the center.
The Hamppe–Muzio Gambit (or Vienna Hamppe–Muzio Gambit) is characterised by the continuation 3...exf4 4.Nf3 g5 5.Bc4 g4 6.0-0 gxf3 7.Qxf3 (see diagram).
As with its close relative, the sharpMuzio Gambit, White sacrifices the knight on f3 in return for a powerful attack against the black king. It is named after Austrian theoreticianCarl Hamppeand classified underECOcode C25. TheDuboisVariation continues 7...Ne5 8.Qxf4 Qf6.
6.d4 is the Pierce Gambit.
The Steinitz Gambit, 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.f4 exf4 4.d4, was a favorite ofWilhelm Steinitz, the firstWorld Champion. White allows Black to misplace White's king with 4...Qh4+ 5.Ke2 (see diagram), hoping to prove that White's pawn center and the exposed position of Black's queen are more significant factors. Unlike Steinitz, who famously opined that, "The King is a fighting piece!", few modern players are willing to expose their king this way. The Steinitz Gambit is thus rarely seen today.
Louis Paulsenplayed 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 four times with the white pieces – games against Meitner, Rosenthal, Gelbfuhs, and Bird in theVienna 1873 chess tournament. Three wins with the variation 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3 named the "Paulsen Variation" of the Vienna Game, and the fourth win after 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Bc5 3.Nf3 vs. Henry Bird.[12]
Most often, White plays 3.Bc4, when the solid 3...Nf6 transposes to the 2...Nf6 3.Bc4 Nc6 line. Weaker is 3.Bc4 Bc5, when 4.Qg4! is awkward to meet. 4...Kf8 and 4...g6 are thought the best moves, but neither is too appealing for Black. The natural 4...Qf6?? loses to 5.Nd5! Qxf2+ 6.Kd1, when White's king is in no real danger, and White has multiple threats:  7.Qxg7; 7.Nxc7+; and 7.Nh3 Qd4 8.d3 threatening to trap Black's queen with 9.c3.[13]
This is an offbeat butplayablealternative, as played (for example) by former world championJosé Raúl CapablancaagainstIlya Kanat Moscow 1936.[14]Some possible moves are 3.Bc4, 3.Nf3, and 3.f4. With move 3.Bc4, ...Nf6 and ...Nc6 can be found above, or Black can play ...d6.
White can continue with 3.Nf3, and if the move 3...Nc6?!(transposing to theThree Knights Game) 4.Nxe5! Nxe5 5.d4 Bd6 6.dxe5 Bxe5 7.Bd3 leads to a large advantage for White.[15]Stronger is 3...d6! Then 4.Na4 Nd7 5.d3 Ngf6 6.Be2 0-0 7.0-0 c6 8.Nxc5 Nxc5 9.Ne1 Ne6 10.c3 d5 is about even.[16]The main line runs 4.d4 exd4 5.Nxd4 Nf6 6.Bg5 (6.Be2 d5 7.e5 Ne4 8.0-0 Nxc3 leads to equality[16]) h6 7.Bh4 0-0 8.Nb3 and now de Firmian inMCO-15gives 8...Bb4 9.Bd3 Re8 10.0-0 Bxc3 11.bxc3 g5! 12.Bg3 Nxe4, when Black's "chances are at least equal".[16]
After 3.f4, ...d6 leads to theKing's Gambit Declined.[16]Weak is 3.Qg4 Nf6! 4.Qxg7 Rg8 5.Qh6 Bxf2+ when Black had a large advantage in Tsikhelashvili–Karpov, USSR 1968, since 6.Kxf2?? Ng4+ would win White's queen.[16]Another offbeat possibility is 3.Na4, the Hamppe Variation,[17]when 3...Bxf2+! 4.Kxf2 Qh4+ 5.Ke3 Qf4+ 6.Kd3 d5 leads to wild complications favoring Black, as in the famousImmortal Drawgame Hamppe–Meitner, Vienna 1872. The quiet 3...Be7, however, leaves Black with a good game.[18]

---

