---
layout: post
title:  "Nimzo Indian Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Nimzo Indian Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Nimzo-Indian-Defense)
The Nimzo-Indian Defense (often called "the Nimzo" for short) is considered one of Black's best responses to White's 1.d4 opener. Black often gives up the bishop pair, but in exchange receives the better pawn structure and easy development. Black will also try to keep the position closed, while White seeks to open up the center for the two bishops.
TheNimzo-Indian Defenseappears after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4. Black pins the white knight to the king, helping to control the e4 square.
White has tried several fourth moves against the Nimzo-Indian over the years. No fewer than nine of them have appeared at least 700 times in master play, and seven of them at least 1800 times. Two have become particularly popular, with over 25,000 appearances. No matter which of the top nine fourth moves White chooses, however, White wins only between 34 and 37% of games. No wonder the opening is considered so strong for Black.
Most variations revolve around two key, intertwined questions: Will Black exchange bishop for knight on c3, and if so, will White recapture with a piece or accept doubled pawns and retake with bxc3?
In the most common continuation, White begins to develop the kingside with4.e3, admitting that the pawn won't reach e4 any time soon. White has the option to play5.Ne2and recapture on c3 with the knight. If White is more concerned about development than pawn structure,5.Bd3will be played before the knight moves, giving Black an extra opportunityto double up White's pawns.
A key sub-variation of the Rubinstein is the Hubner variation, named for GMRobert Hubner, which reaches the position below after the moves 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3c5 5.Bd3 Nc6 6.Nf3 Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 d6.
Almost as popular as the Rubinstein, White immediately sidesteps the prospect of doubled pawns with4.Qc2in what is usually known as the Classical Variation, and sometimes the Capablanca Variation after the Cuban world champion,Jose Raul Capablanca. The intent of this move is best demonstrated by the most common continuation,4...O-O 5.a3 Bxc3 6.Qxc3.
In the aptly-named Three Knights, White plays the third knight move of the game (counting both sides) with4.Nf3. GM Garry Kasparov used it extensively to win the world championship from GM Anatoly Karpov in 1985, scoring +3 =3 in six tries during the match, with another win early in their 1986 rematch, and so it is sometimes referred to as the Kasparov Variation.
If Black makes the most popular reply,4...d5, the game has transposed into the Ragozin Variation of the Queen's Gambit.
In the Kmoch Variation,4.f3, White insists on trying to play the e-pawn two squares forward instead of one. The Kmoch usually transposes into a form of the Samisch (below) after the typical continuation4...d5(stopping 5.e4)5.a3.
The Samisch,4.a3by White, not only makes no effort to avoid doubled pawns, but actively encourages the continuation4...Bxc3 5.bxc3. It's not the most popular variation because White often loses the c4-pawn by force, and the move 4.a3 does nothing to help White's development or position in the center. However, the Samisch remains perhaps the most important variation in Nimzo-Indian opening theory, because it so forcefully creates the two bishops vs. doubled pawn dynamic.
GM Fabien Libiszewski covered the Samisch inthis Chess.com Lesson.
4.Bg5, the Leningrad, allows White to play e3 later without blocking in the dark-squared bishop.
4.g3, the Romanishin-Kasparov. White sometimes fianchettoes in the Three Knights, which was Kasparov's treatment in the mid-1980s, and 4.g3 can easily transpose to those variations.
4.Bd2has no unique name, but it is a playable, immediate way to avoid doubled pawns, albeit rather passive.
4.Qb3, the Spielmann Variation after Austrian masterRudolf Spielmann, has a similar idea to the Classical Variation, but4...c5for Black protects the bishop and engines already give Black a tiny edge.
Games that begin1.d4 Nf6are known as "Indian" openings. The origins regarding why are unclear, but CM Arne Mollwrote about them in 2018, and they can be traced back in part to an Indian player in the mid-19th century named Bannerjee Moheschunder. The other half of the name "Nimzo-Indian" comes fromAron Nimzowitsch, who was not the first master to play the opening, but perhaps the most important player in popularizing it.
When the 1920s began, the opening was still little-known, but by the end of the decade, it was one of Black's favored defenses to 1.d4. It first appeared in world championship play in the second game of the 1929 match betweenAlexander AlekhineandEfim Bogoljubovand has been played at least once in nearly every world championship since (although not since 2013, and extremely unlikely to be seen in 2021--challenger GMIan Nepomniachtchirarely plays 1.d4 as White and has played the Nimzo as Black exactly once, in a 2020 rapid game).
The opening has never lost its luster and remains a key weapon for Black to this day. After 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6, White plays3.Nf3more often than 3.Nc3 in part because of the strength of the Nimzo.
One of the most famous games of all time was played out of the Nimzo-Indian, with future world championMikhail Botvinnikdefeating former world champion Capablanca at the legendary AVRO tournament of 1938 (Moll, again,on that tournament here). Capablanca used his favorable queenside structure to win a pawn on that side of the board, but Botvinnik won the game thanks to his central pawns and a celebrated combination that started on move 30.
Black's most famous win was played by the namesake of the opening, Aron Nimzowitsch, in his contest against Paul Johner at Dresden in 1926. Nimzowitsch successfully bottled up Johner's bishops by closing the position, and his famous maneuver on moves 12-16 set up an eventual kingside attack that was decisive.
The Nimzo-Indian is one of Black's most popular responses to 1.d4. The pin on the c3 knight is hard for White to deal with and Black often gets good positions with pressure on White's center. Play around in theChess.com Explorerto see more variations.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nimzo-Indian_Defence)
TheNimzo-Indian Defenceis achess openingcharacterised by the moves:
Other move orders, such as 1.c4 e6 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.d4 Bb4, are also feasible. In theEncyclopaedia of Chess Openings, the Nimzo-Indian is classified as E20–E59.
Thishypermodernopening was developed byAron Nimzowitschwho introduced it to master-levelchessin the early 20th century. Unlike mostIndian openings, the Nimzo-Indian does not involve an immediatefianchetto, although Black often follows up with ...b6 and ...Bb7. By pinning White'sknight, Black prevents the threatened 4.e4 and seeks to inflictdoubled pawnson White. White will attempt to create apawn centreand develop their pieces to prepare for an assault on the Black position.
Black's delay in committing to apawn structuremakes the Nimzo-Indian (sometimes colloquially referred to as the "Nimzo") a very flexible defence to1.d4. It can also transpose into lines of theQueen's GambitorQueen's Indian Defence. The Nimzo-Indian is a highly respected defence to 1.d4, is played at all levels and has been played by every world champion sinceCapablanca. White often plays 3.g3 or 3.Nf3 to avoid the Nimzo-Indian, allowing them to meet 3.Nf3 Bb4+ (theBogo-Indian Defence) with 4.Bd2 or 4.Nbd2, rather than 4.Nc3.
In the Nimzo-Indian, Black is generally prepared to concede the bishop pair by playing Bxc3. As dynamic compensation, they often double White's c-pawns, which represent a static weakness, and gains play against the central light squares d5 and e4, even in those instances where White is able to recapture with a piece after ...Bxc3. By pinning the knight to the king, black indirectly controls the center by preventing the move e4. Black will aim to close the position to reduce the scope of White's bishops. To this end, Black must blockade the white pawn centre from advancing and neutralise White's attacking chances on thekingside. An example of Black's strategy carried out successfully is the gameMikhail Botvinnik–Samuel Reshevskyfrom the1948 World Chess Championship,[1]which reached the position in the diagram after White's 24th move.
Earlier in the game, Reshevsky was able to block White's kingside attack by playing ...Nf6–e8 and ...f7–f5. Now, both White's bishops are reduced to defence, and White's queen is reduced to passivity at the a2-square to defend the pawns on a3 and c4. Without prospects for counterplay, White's game is strategically hopeless, and Black ultimately exchanged queens and won theendgame.
TheRubinstein System(named afterAkiba Rubinstein) is White's most common method of combating the Nimzo-Indian.Svetozar GligorićandLajos Portischmade great contributions to the theory and practice of this line at top level during their careers. White continues their development before committing to a definite plan of action. In reply, Black has three main moves to choose from: 4...0-0, 4...c5, and 4...b6.
In addition, Black sometimes plays 4...d5 or 4...Nc6. The move 4...d5 can transpose to lines arising from 4...0-0, but White has the extra option of 5.a3 (known as theBotvinnik Variation). This forces Black to retreat the bishop to e7 or capture on c3, which transposes to a line of the Sämisch Variation long considered good for White because they will undouble their pawns at some point by playing cxd5, eliminating the weak pawn on c4, then prepare the e4 pawn break, backed by the bishop pair (and in some cases with f3, since they haven't committed the knight to that square yet), which will gain force in the more open type of position which will ensue. 4...Nc6 is theTaimanov Variation, named after Russian GMMark Taimanov. Black prepares to play ...e5, which may be preceded by...d5 and ...dxc4, or ...d6. The variation was tried several times by the youngBobby Fischer, and has long been favoured by GMNukhim Rashkovsky.
Black's most flexible and frequently played response is 4...0-0. The main line continues 5.Bd3 d5 6.Nf3 c5 7.0-0, reaching the position in the diagram.
White has completed their kingside development, while Black has claimed their share of the centre. At this point, the most important continuations are:
After 7...dxc4 8.Bxc4,  Black also has two rare alternatives on their eighth move worth mentioning: 8...Qe7 intending ...Rd8 is theSmyslov Variation, invented by former world championVasily Smyslov, and  8...Bd7 followed by ...Bc6  is theBronstein Variation, the brainchild of two-time world championship finalistDavid Bronstein.
In general, the main line of the Rubinstein has held up very well for Black, so since the 1980s White has begun to look elsewhere for chances of obtaining an advantage. In the Rubinstein, White has often resorted to playing Ne2 rather than Nf3 at some point to be able to recapture on c3 with the knight, thus avoiding the doubled pawns. Two lines where White does this (following 4.e3 0-0) are:
Black puts pressure on d4 and leaves open the option of playing ...d5, or ...d6 and ...e5. The game can still transpose to the main line mentioned above after moves such as 5.Bd3 d5 6.Nf3 0-0 7.0-0, but there are two major variations particular to 4...c5:
Favoured by Nimzowitsch, 4...b6 is a move in accordance with the spirit of the Nimzo-Indian: Blackfianchettoestheir light-squared bishop to increase their control over e4. White usually continues 5.Ne2, avoiding the doubled pawns, or 5.Bd3, continuing their development (5.Nf3 usually transposes to 5.Bd3). The main variations emerging from these moves are:
TheClassicalorCapablanca Variationwas popular in the early days of the Nimzo-Indian, and though eventually superseded by 4.e3 it was revived in the 1990s; it is now just as popular as the Rubinstein. White aims to acquire the two bishops without compromising their pawn structure. The drawback is that the queen will move at least twice within the opening moves and that White's kingside development is delayed. Thus, even though White possesses the bishop pair, it is usually advisable for Black to open the game quickly to exploit their lead in development. Black has four common replies to 4.Qc2. These include 4...0-0, 4...c5, 4...d5, and 4...Nc6  (4...d6 intending ...Nbd7 and ...e5 is a rarer fifth option).
4.Nf3 is known as theKasparov Variation, sinceGarry Kasparovused it to great effect againstAnatoly Karpovin their 1985 World Championship match. Kasparov played 4.Nf3 six times, scoring three wins and three draws.[5]Today as White, this is a favourite weapon of GMAlexei Barsovand former Women's ChampionNona Gaprindashvili. It is also sometimes known as the purely descriptiveThree Knights Variation.
White develops the knight to a natural square and waits to see Black's reply. 4...d5 transposes to the Ragozin Defence of the Queen's Gambit Declined and 4...b6 5.Bg5 Bb7 transposes to the Nimzo/Queen's Indian hybrid line, so 4...c5 is the most common move that stays within Nimzo-Indian territory. Now 5.e3 transposes to the Rubinstein System, but the main move is 5.g3, which leads to a position that also arises from the Fianchetto Variation. 5.g3 cxd4 6.Nxd4 0-0 7.Bg2 d5 8.cxd5 Nxd5 can be considered the main line. Black has dissolved White's centre, but the bishop on g2 exerts pressure on the black queenside, which White may augment with 9.Qb3.
This line can also arise from theBogo-Indian Defence(1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 Bb4+) if White blocks the check with 4.Nc3.[6]
In theEncyclopaedia of Chess Openings, the Nimzo-Indian Defence has codes E20 to E59. All codes begin with 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4, excluding E20, which also includes alternatives to 3...Bb4 apart from 3...d5 (which would be theQueen's Gambit Declined).

---

