---
layout: post
title:  "Kings Indian Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Kings Indian Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Kings-Indian-Defense)
The King's Indian Defense is ahypermodernaggressive opening for Black as a response for 1.d4. Following hypermodern principles, Black allows White to build a strong pawn center to later counter-attack it. A sharp opening, the King's Indian is not be the best choice for beginners. However, a number of strong grandmasters likeBobby FischerandGarry Kasparovconsistently employed this opening when fighting for a win with the black pieces.
TheKing's Indian Defensearises after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6. Like in other hypermodern openings, Black doesn't try to control the center with pawns. Instead, the idea is to let White build a strong pawn center and then counter-attack it using pieces and pawns.
The King's Indian leads to unbalanced positions where Black tries to fight for an advantage instead of equality. For this reason, it's also a risky opening which usually leads to White having an edge when playing accurately. However, it's also more difficult for White to play for a draw, which tends to lead to more decisive games.
The theory on the King's Indian is extensive, with many different lines that are popular among top players.
The main line of the King's Indian sees White building a strong pawn center and Black playing the thematic central pawn break with 6...e5. Black will usually play for checkmate with a kingside attack, while White will likely counter-attack the queenside.
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Nf3 O-O 6.Be2 e5 7.O-O Nc6

The widely popular Samisch variation starts after White plays 5.f3. With this move, White lends support to the e4-pawn and prevents the black f6-knight from jumping to g4. The game usually develops into an all-out war, with players castling to opposite sides of the board. White can also try to squeeze Black slowly with their space advantage.
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.f3
Another popular variation is the Averbakh, where White develops the dark-squared bishop to g5. This move discourages the typical King's Indian e7-e5 pawn break.
1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 O-O 6. Bg5
The Petrosian variation is another way to face the King's Indian. White plays the early 7.d5, closing down the center and slowing down the game—something not all King's Indian players are comfortable with. Black will usually maneuver to attack the kingside, with White going for the queenside.
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Nf3 O-O 6.Be2 e5 7.d5
The Four Pawns Attack was considered one of the best responses of the King's Indian for years. White accepts Black's challenge and takes the whole center with pawns on c4, d4, e4, and f4. White can then go for a sharp game or try to create a bind. However, the current theory states that White's immense pawn center is slightly flimsy and can be a liability.
1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4
White's score is usually favorable against the King's Indian Defense. Black's attempt to create an unbalanced position to fight for the advantage can backfire, and statistics show that the well-prepared White player will usually win or draw the game. Below are the variations that have been played numerous times by masters and score well against the King's Indian:
If you study the main line of the King's Indian for White, you're likely to enjoy considerable success against it. Of the more than 54,000 games in our masters database following the main line, White wins 42%, draws 30%, and loses merely 28%. As stated above, the main line goes1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Nf3 O-O 6.Be2.
If you'd like to try to surprise your opponent with a sideline, you might want to consider the Makogonov Variation. This variation is gaining popularity among super grandmasters as a way of fighting the King's Indian. With close to 5,000 games in our masters database, White won 51% of the games, drew 24%, and lost only 25%.
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.h3.
With 5.h3, White wants to make the g2-g4 push to stop Black's thematic plan of playing f7-f5. The h3-pawn also stops Black from playing Ng4, allowing White to develop their dark-squared bishop to d3 safely.
The King's Indian Defense has been around for centuries, but many masters considered it a suspicious opening since it gave up control of the center. The opening started gaining traction after the rise of hypermodernism in chess and became widely accepted after strong players like GMDavid Bronsteinemployed it successfully.
Many strong grandmasters have adopted this opening, including former world champions GMMikhail Taland Kasparov. The King's Indian is still largely used in tournaments, with players such as GMsTeimour RadjabovandHikaru Nakamurachoosing it as one of their main weapons with Black.
If you want to improve your understanding of the King's Indian, you should study the games of players like Bronstein, Tal, Kasparov, and GM Bobby Fischer. Below are some famous games with this opening:
GM Viktor Korchnoi vs. Fischer
GM Anatoly Karpov vs. Kasparov
You now know what the King's Indian Defense is, how to reach it, its main ideas, and how to play against it. Head over to ourMaster Gamesto learn the main ideas behind this opening and win more games!

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King%27s_Indian_Defence)
TheKing's Indian Defence(orKID) is a commonchess opening. It is defined by the following  moves:
Black intends to follow up with 3...Bg7 and 4...d6 (theGrünfeld Defencearises when Black plays 3...d5 instead and is considered a separate opening). White's major third move options are 3.Nc3, 3.Nf3 or 3.g3, with both the King's Indian and Grünfeld playable against these moves. TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingsclassifies the King's Indian Defence under the codes E60 through E99.
The King's Indian is ahypermodernopening, where Black deliberately allows White control of thecentrewith pawns, with the view to subsequently challenge it. In the most critical lines of the King's Indian, White erects an imposing pawn centre with Nc3 followed by e4. Black stakes out their own claim to the centre with theBenoni-style ...c5, or ...e5. If White resolves the central pawn tension with d5, then Black follows with either ...b5 and queenside play, or ...f5 and an eventual kingside attack. Meanwhile, White attempts to expand on the opposite wing. The resulting unbalanced positions offer scope for both sides to play for a win.
The earliest known use of the term "Indian Defence" was in 1884. The modern names "King's Indian Defence", "King's Indian Attack", etc. arose in the mid-twentieth century and are attributed toHans Kmoch. Until the mid-1930s, the King's Indian Defence was generally regarded as highly suspect, but the analysis and play of three strong Soviet players in particular—Alexander Konstantinopolsky,Isaac Boleslavsky, andDavid Bronstein—helped to make the defence much more respected and popular. It is a dynamic opening, exceptionally complex, and a favourite of formerworld championsGarry Kasparov,Bobby Fischer, andMikhail Tal, with prominentgrandmastersViktor Korchnoi,Miguel Najdorf,Efim Geller,John Nunn,Svetozar Gligorić,Wolfgang Uhlmann, andIlya Smirinhaving also contributed much to the theory and practice of this opening.
In the early 2000s the opening's popularity suffered afterVladimir Kramnikbegan scoring excellently against it, so much so that Kasparov gave up the opening after several critical losses to Kramnik. However, Kramnik himself won a game on the black side of the KID in 2012,[1]and current top players includingHikaru Nakamura,Teimour Radjabov, andDing Lirenplay the opening.
The main variations of the King's Indian are:
TheClassical Variationis 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Nf3 0-0 6.Be2 e5.
A minor but still significant sideline occurs for White on move 6, with 6.Bg5, the Zinnowitz Variation, instead of 6.Be2 e5. The line was played several times by German GrandmasterBurkhard Malichin the 1960s and 1970s.[3]It is currently unfashionable at master level; Black gets a good game with either 6...h6 or 6...Nbd7. This line is distinct from the much more popular Averbakh Variation, described below, since in the Zinnowitz, White has played 5.Nf3 instead of 5.Be2, as in the Averbakh, and then follows with 6.Bg5.
Another, more significant and quite popular sideline occurs for Black on move 6, with 6...Bg4, in place of the mainline 6...e5. One idea for Black here is to relieve their somewhat cramped position by exchanging their light-squared bishop, which is often relegated to a passive role in the King's Indian. White's most popular response is 7.Be3, similar to the Gligoric System (see above); White seems to retain a small edge in every variation. Top players who have used this line for Black include two former World Champions: GMsMikhail TalandBoris Spassky.[4]
After 6...c5 7.O-O cxd4 8.Nxd4 Nc6, the game transposes into theAccelerated Dragonvariation of theSicilian Defence.
TheSämisch Variationis 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.f3. It is named afterFriedrich Sämisch, who developed the system in the 1920s. This often leads to very sharp play with the players castling on opposite wings and attacking each other's kings, as in the Bagirov–Gufeld game given below, though it may also give rise to heavyweight positional struggles. Black has a variety of pawn breaks, such as ...e5, ...c5 and ...b5 (prepared by ...c6 and/or ...a6). This can transpose to theModern Benoniafter 5...0-0 6.Bg5 c5 7.d5 e6. World championsMikhail Botvinnik,Mikhail Tal,Tigran Petrosian,Boris Spassky,Anatoly KarpovandGarry Kasparovhave all played this variation. This line defends the e4-pawn to create a secure centre and enables White to begin an attack kingside with Be3, Qd2, Bh6, g2–g4 and h2–h4. It allows placement of a bishop on e3 without allowing ...Ng4; however, its drawback is that it deprives the knight on g1 of its most natural square, thus impeding development of the kingside. Black can strike for the centre as previously mentioned or delay with 6...Nc6, 7...a6 and 8...Rb8 so that Black can play ...b7–b5 to open lines on the queenside.
The Classical Defence to the Sämisch is 5...0-0 6.Be3 e5, when White has a choice between closing the centre with 7.d5, or maintaining the tension with 7.Nge2. Kasparov was a major proponent of this defence.[5]
The Sämisch Gambit arises after 5...0-0 6.Be3 c5. This is a pawn sacrifice, and was once considered dubious. As Black's play has been worked out, this evaluation has changed, and the gambit now enjoys a good reputation. A practical drawback, however, is that a well-prepared but unambitious White player can often enter lines leading to a forceddraw.[5]The line where White accepts the gambit runs 5...0-0 6.Be3 c5 7.dxc5 dxc5 8.Qxd8 (8.e5 Nfd7 9.f4 f6 10.exf6 is also possible here, though less often seen) Rxd8 9.Bxc5 Nc6. Black's activity is believed to give sufficient compensation. White's most frequent play is to decline the gambit, and instead play 7.Nge2, and head for Benoni type positions after a d4–d5 advance. However, after 7...cxd4 (preventing the d4-d5 advance) 8.Nxd4 Nc6, the game transposes into theAccelerated Dragonvariation of theSicilian Defence.
5...0-0 6.Be3 Nc6 7.Nge2 a6 8.Qd2 Rb8 leads to thePanno Variationof the Sämisch. Black prepares to respond appropriately depending on White's choice of plan. If White plays 0-0-0 and goes for a kingside attack, then 7...a6 prepares ...b7–b5 with a counterattack against White's castled position. If instead White plays more cautiously, then Black challenges White's centre with ...e5.
TheAverbakh Variationis 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Be2 0-0 6.Bg5 (named forYuri Averbakh), which prevents the immediate 6...e5 (6...e5?7. dxe5 dxe5 8. Qxd8 Rxd8 9. Nd5 Nxd5 (If black doesn't play Nxd5, black loses the f6 knight)10. Bxd8 Nb6 11.  Bxc7 White is up an exchange and a pawn, the endgame should be winning for white.)
Black often repels the bishop with ...h6 giving them the option of a later g5, though in practice this is a weakening move. White has various ways to develop, such as Qd2, Nf3, f4 or even h4. However, Black obtains good play against all of these development schemes.
The old main line in this begins with 6...c5 (which keeps the long diagonal open).
However, 6...Nbd7 and 6...Na6 (Judit Polgár's move) are also seen.
It is possible that theAverbakh System(of the Modern Defense) can transition to the Averbakh Variation of the King's Indian Defence.
TheFour Pawns Attackcontinues with 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.f4 0-0 6.Nf3. This is the most aggressive method for White, and was often seen in the 1920s. With their fifth move, White erects a massive centre at the price of falling behind in development. If Black can open the position, White may well find themselves overextended. From this 6...c5 is the main line.
TheFianchettoVariation1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nf3 Bg7 4.g3 0-0 5.Bg2 d6 6.0-0, is named for White's development of light-squared bishop to g2, and is one of the most popular lines at the grandmaster level,Korchnoionce its most notable practitioner. This method of development is on completely different lines than other King's Indian variations. Here, Black's normal plan of attack can hardly succeed, as White's kingside is more solidly defended than in most KID variations. The most common responses are:
Finally, White has other setups, such as Nf3 and h3 and Nge2 (with or without Bd3), but these are currently not as popular at the grandmaster level. 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Nge2 followed by 6.Ng3 is called theHungarian Attack.
One of the earliest examples:
One of the most famous King's Indian games was abrilliancyby the lateUkrainian-American grandmasterEduard Gufeld, who called it his "Mona Lisa":[8]
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openings(ECO) classification of variations of the King's Indian are:

---

