---
layout: post
title:  "Alekhine Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Alekhine Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Alekhines-Defense)
Alekhine's Defense is ahypermodernresponse to 1.e4. Black lets White establish a presence in the center with the goal of proving it overextended. Although 1...Nf6 is only Black's eighth-most popular response to 1.e4, it scores as well as some much more common moves like the#3 French (1...e6) and #5 Pirc (1...d6).
TheAlekhine Defenseis1.e4 Nf6. Games almost always continue2.e5 Nd5followed mostly by3.d4 d6. Black's third move is the first little poke at White's center.
White has two main fourth moves in Alekhine's Defense:4.Nf3, the Modern Variation, and4.c4 Nb6, which turns into the Exchange Variation after5.exd6or the Four Pawns Attack after5.f4.
White and Black have the same main goals in each variation: White is trying to hold ground in the center and Black is trying to take it down.
The Modern Variation is White's most popular choice, focusing on development to support the center with pieces. It is called the Modern in comparison to the more classical approach of continuing to place pawns in the center.
Black's main responses are the Main Line4...Bg4, the Alburt Variation4...g6, and the Larsen Variation4...dxe5.
All three moves fight for e5: the Main Line pins one of White's defenders of the square; the Alburt Variation will hit e5 after the ...Bg7 fianchetto; and the Larsen Variation simply captures White's occupant of the square.
After 4.c4 Nb6 5.exd6, Black can and does recapture all three ways, but almost always with one of the pawns. (Although 5...) Black can either keep pawn structure symmetry with5...exd6, or go for imbalance [and a central pawn majority] with5...cxd6. Both moves are about equally popular, with a slight edge to the c-pawn recapture.
The Four Pawns Attack is White's most confrontational response to Alekhine's Defense. Although it establishes a gigantic center, White gives Black much better statistical chances than in the Exchange Variation. The main continuation for Black is5...dxe5, but5...Bf5and5...g6can also be played.
The Four Pawns is also the most important line in Alekhine theory: If it were crushing for White, the entire opening would be dubious, but as things are Black has enough counterplay.
Instead of 2.e5, a beginner may be tempted to protect the e-pawn with2.d3. This is called the Maroczy Variation but it is extremely passive and scores poorly after2...e5by Black.
Black on move two can also play the rather amusing2...Ng8instead of 2...Nd5. This is called the Brooklyn Variation, but it is a bit too provocative to be recommended.
3.c4on move three is the Two Pawns Attack. It usually transposes with White playing 4.d4 next, as4.c5 Nd5performs well for Black, with the d5-knight now untouchable by White's pawns.
3.Nc3was Friedrich Samisch's move. White can recapture either way after 3...Nxc3 but the variation is not very testing of Black's idea behind the opening.
The Modern Variation is White's most successful in addition to most popular. Black's responses to it all score about the same, with a slight edge to the Alburt Variation.
Against the Exchange Variation, 5...exd6 results in many more draws (31%) because it maintains a symmetrical pawn structure. 5...cxd6 is better if Black needs a decisive result.
Although the most common response to the Four Pawns is to capture on e5, Black scores better with5...Bf5(Trifunovic Variation) or5...g6(Fianchetto Variation).
Alexander Alekhinefirst played Alekhine's Defense at Budapest in 1921, scoring a win and a draw, and continued playing it during the 1920s. Alekhine did not create the opening, and games from the 19th century that begin with 1.e4 Nf6 can be found, but his use popularized it.
The opening first appeared in a world championship in 1935, but it wasMax Euweplaying itagainstAlekhine! They drew the game. The only other player to ever use the opening in the classical world championship was GMBobby Fischerin 1972, who scored a famous win over GMBoris Spasskyin Game 13.
GMLev Alburtis one of the few grandmasters in history to use the Alekhine as a main weapon against 1.e4. The opening is also a favorite of Chess.com's NMSam Copeland.
Fischer effectively wrapped up his world title in this marathon of a game, the 13th of the match, drawing the next seven contests before clinching the match in game 21.
For a win with White against the Alekhine, few games are as stunning as GMNigel Short's king walk against GMJan Timmanin 1991.
Alekhine's Defense isn't the most common way for Black to meet 1.e4, but it is effective in the right hands, and logical in its goal of creating targets in the opposing side's center. Study it more in our Chess.comOpening Explorer.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alekhine%27s_Defence)
Alekhine's Defenceis achess openingthat begins with the moves:
Blacktempts White's pawns forward to form a broadpawn centre, with plans to undermine and attack the white structure later in the spirit ofhypermoderndefence. White's imposing mass of pawns in the centre often includes pawns on c4, d4, e5, and f4.Grandmaster(GM)Nick de Firmianobserves of Alekhine's Defence inMCO-15(2008), "The game immediately loses any sense of symmetry or balance, which makes the opening a good choice for aggressive fighting players."[1]
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingshas four codes for Alekhine's Defence, B02 through B05:
The opening is named afterAlexander Alekhine, who introduced it in the1921Budapesttournament in games againstEndre Steiner[2]andFritz Sämisch.[3][4]Four years later, the editors of the Fourth Edition ofModern Chess Openings(MCO-4) wrote:
Nothing is more indicative of the iconoclastic conceptions of the 'hypermodern school' than the bizarre defence introduced by Alekhine ... . Although opposing to all tenets of the classical school, Black allows his King's Knight to be driven about the board in the early stages of the game, in the expectation of provoking a weakness in White's centre pawns.[5]
In addition to Alekhine, another early exponent of the defence wasErnst Grünfeld.
Alekhine's Defence was more popular in the past. For instance,Bobby Fischerused it in two games againstBoris Spasskyin theWorld Chess Championship 1972, andViktor Korchnoialso included the defence in hisrepertoire, leading to its respectable reputation.[1]Nowadays, Alekhine's Defence is not so common at the top level. De Firmian observes, "The fashion could quickly change if some champion of the opening takes up the cause, as the results Black has obtained in practice are good."[1]The opening's current highest-rated proponent isGMVassily Ivanchuk, althoughLev Alburtplayed it at grandmaster-level almost exclusively during his career and was responsible for many contributions in both theory and practice. Currently, grandmastersAlexander ShabalovandArtashes Minasianuse the opening with regularity, whileLevon Aronian,Michael Adams, andHikaru Nakamurawill use it on occasion.Magnus Carlsendoes not employ the opening frequently but he has used it occasionally in competitive games, most notably to defeat the formerWorld Chess ChampionVeselin TopalovatLinares 2008.
A game byNapoléon Bonapartefrom the 19th century shows one of the oldest known examples of Alekhine's Defence being employed in a game.[6]Napoléon won the game.[6]
After the usual 2.e5 Nd5, three main variations of Alekhine's Defence use 3.d4, but there are other options for White at this point. Two of the main lines are theExchange Variationand theFour Pawns Attack. The Exchange Variation continues 3.d4 d6 4.c4 Nb6 5.exd6.  White has somespaceadvantage.  Black can capitalise on thehalf-opencentre with ...g6, ...Bg7 with ...Bg4 eventually being played.  The Four Pawns Attack continues 3.d4 d6 4.c4 Nb6 5.f4.  White has a somewhat larger space advantage though the centre is not fixed.  Black has a number of options.  Black can play ...Qd7 with ...0-0-0 and ...f6 putting pressure on White's d-pawn.  Black can play ...Nb4 with ...c5 hoping to exchange the d-pawn.  Finally, Black can play ...Be7 with ...0-0 and ...f6 attacking the centre.  Minor variations include O'Sullivan's Gambit, 3.d4 b5 (intending 4.Bxb5 c5 5.dxc5??Qa5+), and 3.d4 d6 4.Bc4, the Balogh Variation.
The Four Pawns Attack is White's most ambitious line against the Alekhine's, and the variation which perhaps best illustrates the basic idea behind the defence: Black allows White to make severaltempo-gaining attacks on theknightand to erect an apparently imposing pawn centre in the belief that it can later be destroyed. The game can become verysharpsince White must either secure an advantage in space or make use of it before Black succeeds in making a successful strike at it. Black must also play vigorously because passive play will be crushed by the white centre. In addition, while White has built a crushing center, it also becomes undesirable to advance further - c5 can give the Black knight the d5-outpost, while d5 is usually undesirable due to it critically weakening e5. While the main target of Black is d4, the pawn on c4 also can be pressurized considerably via ...Na5. The Four Pawns Attack is not particularly popular because many White players are wary of entering a sharp tactical line which Black may have prepared. The main line continues 5...dxe5 6.fxe5 Nc6 (attacking d4) 7.Be3 (7.Nf3 allows 7...Bg4! when the pressure on d4 is very tough) Bf5 (first developing before ...e6) 8.Nc3 e6 9.Nf3. White now usually plays 9.Nf3 to protect e5, thus preparing a potential d5 advance, and since 9...Bg4!? would cost Black a tempo, though it is still an option for Black, as it adds pressure against d4, though after an exchange with ...Bxf3 gxf3 White would get the bishop-pair and an even stronger center with the f-pawn. The mainline is 9...Be7, preparing ...f6 to break apart White's center. White used to automatically play 10.d5 in response to counter this, which can lead to complex & sharp play. However, a recent development has been 10.Be2 O-O 11.O-O f6 12.exf6 Bxf6 13.Qd2 (preparing Rad1 and also connecting rooks) Qe7 (Black in turn connecting rooks and also preparing ...Rad8) 14.Rad1 Rad8 15.Kh1! which in 1-0 Ray Robson–Daniel Naroditsky, US Championship 2021, led to a win for White in 48 moves.[7]The point of this move is that it prevents the ...e5 push, with the extra point of moving the king out of the a7-g1 diagonal. Black also has a weakness in the form of the isolated e6-pawn, while White still has a space advantage.[8]An alternative move is 9...Qd7, which has become popular recently aiming to castle queenside and attack White's kingside, while 9...Bb4 is another line that tries to be more active than ...Be7, but the c3-knight has little role in the defense and thus the line is less popular than the others.
An alternative is the sharp Planinc Variation (also known as the Cambridge Gambit), 5...g5!?. Black hopes for 6.fxg5?dxe5, wrecking White's centre and pawn structure. The line is named after GMAlbin Planinc, who championed it in the 1970s.[citation needed]It was then taken up in the 1990s bycorrespondenceplayer Michael Schirmer, whose games were noted in a recent book on Alekhine's Defence by British GM and Alekhine exponentNigel Davies.
Alternate moves for Black other than 5...dxe5, are 5...g6 - the Fianchetto Variation, and 5... Bf5 - the Trifunovic Variation.
The Exchange Variation is less ambitious than the Four Pawns Attack. White trades pawns, accepting a more modest spatial advantage. Black's main decision is whether to recapture with the solid  5...exd6, which will lead to a fairly strategic position, or the more ambitious 5...cxd6 when Black has a preponderance of pawns in the centre. The third recapture 5...Qxd6 is also possible since thefork6.c5 can be answered by 6...Qe6+, but the line is considered inferior since Black will sooner or later need to deal with this threat.[9]
In the sharper 5...cxd6 line, Black usually aims to attack and undermine the white pawn on d4, and possibly c4 as well. To do this, a usual plan involves afianchettoof theking bishopto g7, playing the other bishop to g4 to remove a knight on f3 which is a key defender of d4, while black knights on b6 and c6 bear down on the white pawns on c4 and d4. Cox gave the game Jainy Gomes–Guillermo Soppe, São Paulo 2001[10]to illustrate Black's intentions.
A popular setup from White to prevent Black's plan is the Voronezh Variation (namedafter the Russian cityVoronezh, where the line was invented, by players such asGrigory Sanakoev). The Voronezh is defined by the opening sequence 1.e4 Nf6 2.e5 Nd5 3.d4 d6 4.c4 Nb6 5.exd6 cxd6 6.Nc3 g6 7.Be3 Bg7 8.Rc1 0-0 9.b3. White's setup delayskingsidedevelopmentso that Black has trouble developing pieces in a fashion that harasses White's pieces and assails the centre pawns; for instance there is no knight on f3 which can become a target after ...Bg4, and no bishop on d3 which may be a target after ...Nc6–e5. While 9...Nc6?!is Black's most common reply according to ChessBase's database, after 10.d5 Ne5 Black's knight lacks a target, and will soon be chased out with f2–f4, and this line has scored very poorly for Black.[9]The main line in the Voronezh, and the second most common reply, is 9...e5 10.dxe5 dxe5 11.Qxd8 Rxd8 12.c5 N6d7 (This retreat is forced since 12...Nd5?? loses the knight due to the 13.Rd1 pin) when Black must play carefully to unentangle and challenge the white pawn on c5. Other lines against the Voronezh include 9...f5 leading to sharp play. Other solid moves such as 9...e6, ...Bd7, ...Bf5, and ...a5 are possible as well. According to John Cox, the 9...e5 line is adequate, but Black needs to know the line well.[9]
The Voronezh was recommended byJohn Emmsand noted as a big problem byNigel Davies,[11]leading many players to opt for the more solid 5...exd6 line. However, the line offers Black less opportunity for counterplay. In this line Black usually develops the king bishop via ...Be7 and ...Bf6, because Bg5 can be bothersome against a fianchetto setup with ...g6 and ...Bg7, e.g. 6.Nc3 g6 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.Bg5.[9]
Although the 5...exd6 structure resembles the drawishExchange French, Black can make several attempts to imbalance the position. First, Black should play 6...Nc6 against almost any White move to prevent White from establishing an ideal Nc3, Bd3, Nge2 setup. If White attempts this, Black can strike the d3-bishop with ...Nb4. Second, Black should castle and maneuver ...Be7–f6. After sufficient preparation, a common Black plan is to push ...d5. If White replies with c5, Black can respond with the unusual-looking ...Nc8 with the idea to maneuver the knight ...Nc8–e7–f5 to strike at the weak d4-pawn.
The Modern Variation is the most common variation of the Alekhine Defence. As in the Exchange Variation, White accepts a more modest spatial advantage, and hopes to be able to hang on to it. There are a number of possible Black responses:
In most variations, Black can play ...Bg4 totransposeinto the 4...Bg4 line.
The first recorded use of this variation wasCanal–Colle,Karlovy Vary1929. White resigned after Black's 40th move.[15]
Unlike several other sidelines, 4.Bc4 is fairly popular. The line contains some traps that can snare the unwary. For example, 4...dxe5 5.dxe5 Nb6?? loses the queen to 6.Bxf7+!Instead, the main line is 4...Nb6 5.Bb3, when Black has usually played 5...dxe5 6.Qh5 e6 7.dxe5 (the "old main line" according to Cox) or 5...Bf5 when White can among other things try the obstructive pawn sacrifice 6.e6. In either case, White obtains attacking chances, and so Taylor recommends 5...d5 followed by 6...e6 to reach a position akin to theFrench Defence.[16]
The Two Pawns Attack (also known as the Lasker Attack or the Chase Variation[17][18]) is also an ambitious try. White may gain attacking prospects, but it might cost a pawn to do so.[19]White's pawns on c5 and e5 secure a spatial advantage, but the d5-square has been weakened. Unlike the Four Pawns Attack, the white centre is not as fluid and the game takes on a more strategic character.
Aesthetically, 4.c5 looks positionally suspect, since White's pawn advances have severely weakened the d5-square.[20]White's intention is to grab space and mobility so that those strategic deficiencies are of little consequence.
Black must play 4...Nd5, whereupon White will usually challenge the knight with moves like Bc4 and Nc3. Black can defend the knight with ...c6 or ...e6, sometimes playing both. Typically, Black then challenges White's pawns on e5 and c5 with moves like ...d6 and ...b6.
The statistics presented by Cox show this variation scoring poorly for White, with all of Black's main defences scoring at least 50%.[9]
In the Two Knights Variation, White immediately acceptsdoubled pawnsafter 3...Nxc3 for some compensation. After 4.dxc3 this compensation is rapid piece development. Although the line after 4...d6, challenging the e-pawn often can lead to fairly dull positions, the position remains open and Black can quickly succumb with poor defence, for example after 5.Bc4 dxe5?? 6.Bxf7+!, White wins the queen on d8. After 4.bxc3 White's compensation for the doubled pawns is a big centre that can be used as a basis for a kingside attack. The resulting pawn structure leads to position similar to that of the Winawer variation of theFrench Defence.[9]
If Black does not want to defend against White's attacking opportunities against 3...Nxc3 4.dxc3, then 3...e6 is a reasonable alternative that was Alekhine's choice when meeting the Two Knights, and this defence has been advocated by Taylor.[21]If White plays 4.d4, then 4...Nxc3 forces White into the bxc3 line reminiscent of the French. If 4.Nxd5 exd5, Black will quickly dissolve the doubled pawns with ...d6, and the resulting position will tend to be drawish.
InEndre Steiner–Alexander Alekhine, Budapest 1921, the first high level game with the Alekhine Defence, White played 3.d4 d6 4.Bg5. Cox recommends 4...h6 5.Bh4 dxe5 6.dxe5 Bf5, followed by ...Nc6 and ...Ndb4, targeting c2.
Another rare line, but one that scores well in practice is 3.d4 d6 4.Be2, preventing Black from playing 4...Bg4 while retaining the option of making the pawn advance f2–f4.[9]
After 3.c4 Nb6 4.a4 (the Emory Tate line), White can aim at chasing the black knight away followed by a pawn sacrifice that impairs Black's development, for example by 4...d6 5.a5 N6d7 6.e6, but this leaves Black with a strong center and an almost-winning position, though the threat of a5 still looms. Black can prevent this with 4...a5. White's main continuation is to deploy thequeen rookfor duties on the kingside with 5.Ra3, followed by Rg3 at some point when the attack on g7 is supposed to tie Black down from developing the bishop to e7. However, after 5...d6 6.exd6 exd6 7.Rg3 Bf5, Black can carry through with 8...Be7 anyway, since after 9.Rxg7 the rook would be trapped and lost to 9...Bg6 and 10...Bf6.[9]The idea for this unusual early "rook lift" probably originated with the well-known AmericanInternational MasterEmory Tate.[22][23]Women's World Champion GMMariya Muzychuk, World Junior Champion GMLu Shangleiand GM Nazar Firman have experimented with this line and achieved some success with it.[24]
After 2.e5, 2...Nd5 is almost universally played. The two other knight moves that do nothangit to the queen on d1 are 2...Ng8 and 2...Ne4.
Instead of chasing Black's knight, White may defend the e4-pawn, either directly orthrough tactical means.
2.Nc3 is by far White's most common alternative to 2.e5; in fact Cox noted that he saw this move in over half his games with the Alekhine. It is often played by amateurs and those wishing to avoid atheoretical battleon territory more familiar to their opponents. Cox, however, wrote that many White players are bluffing, and in fact know nothing about either theVienna Gameor theFour Knights Game, to which the game can easilytransposeif Black plays 2...e5, citing one book which recommended 2.Nc3 while assuring readers that 2...e5 is uncommon.[9]Another transposition Black may enter is 2...d6, which usually leads to thePirc Defence.
The independent Alekhine line is 2...d5, known as the Scandinavian Variation. After 2...d5, 3.exd5 Nxd5 4.Bc4, 4...Nb6 or 4...Nxc3 is considered roughly equal, while 4...e6 is solid but blocks in the light-squared bishop. 4.g3 has been played by the Danish correspondence player Ove Ekebjaerg, when Harald Keilhack recommends 4...Nxc3 5.bxc3 Qd5! 6.Qf3! (6.Nf3 Qe4+ is awkward in light of 7.Be2 Bh3 or 7.Qe2 Qxc2) Qe6+! 7.Qe2 ("on 7.Be2 or 7.Ne2, 7...Bd7 is unpleasant") Qxe2+ 8.Nxe2 Bd7! 9.Bg2 Bc6 10.0-0 Bxg2 11.Kxg2 Nc6 12.d3 g6 13.Rb1 0-0-0 14.c4 Bg7, when "Black has a rather comfortable position", as in Ekebjaerg–Alcantara Soares, corr. 1989.[29]
More combative after 2...d5 is 3.e5, when Black can choose among 3...d4, 3...Nfd7 (transposing to theSteinitzvariation of theFrench Defenceafter 4.d4 e6, but 4.e6!? is a sharp alternative), 3...Ne4!?, and even 3...Ng8. After 3...d4 can follow 4.Nce2 Ng4, or 4.exf6 dxc3 5.fxg7 cxd2+ leading to quick castling for White.
While most grandmasters play the mainline 2.e5,Jonny Hectorregularly plays 2.Nc3 against the Alekhine, and has scored well against the 2...d5 variation. His ideas have left White with a theoretical edge. Textbook authors of the Alekhine Defence, including Davies, Cox, and Taylor, have therefore encouraged 2...e5 over 2...d5.
Bibliography

---

