---
layout: post
title:  "Petrov Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Petrov Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Petrovs-Defense)
Petrov's Defense (also spelled Petroff and alternatively called the Russian Game, Petrov Defense, or simply the Petrov) is one of Black's most solid options against 1.e4. On move two,Black responds to an attack on the e5 pawn by counterattacking the pawn on e4 with the knight. This often leads to a trade of pawns on the e-file.
Although often considered a drawish opening for this reason among others, in the last several years players like GMFabiano Caruanahave shown it to have much more bite than previously thought. That said, it remains a less dynamic opening than many others.
Petrov's Defense begins1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6. The main independent lines of the Petrov are3.Nxe5and3.d4. Also possible on move three is3.Nc3, which transposes into theFour Knights Game.
The Petrov almost always continues3...d6 4.Nf3 Nxe4at which point White has two main options.
The older and still most common continuation is5.d4 d5 6.Bd3at which point Black has several options:6...Be7,6...Bd6,6...Nc6are most common. Both sides develop quickly and strategic play usually ensues.
In recent years, White has started playing5.Nc3on move five, welcoming doubled pawns in exchange for quick development after5...Nxc3 6.dxc3. White usually castles queenside while Black, after the best and most common follow-up,6...Be7, can either castle short or wait in the center and develop the queenside.
Black can blunder in this line if not careful, and no less than GMViswanathan Ananddid so in 1988 by, instead of taking the knight on c3, going for5...Bf5 6.Qe2, at which point he resigned because6...Qe7 7.Nd5loses at least a piece for Black.
It is tempting for less experienced players to try to retain symmetry with3...Nxe4instead of 3...d6, but this move loses at least a pawn, and often more than that if Black isn't careful.
A sideline of Petrov's Defense that has become popular in online blitz in recent times is the Stafford Gambit, which is3...Nc6on move three. More information on the Stafford is availablehere.
5.Qe2is another playable fifth move for White, but it leads to a draw in four out of every five master-level games. In most situations White is playing for some kind of advantage in the opening, which this move does not achieve, but if White only needs a draw the move can be useful.
Petrov's Defense is named for the 19th century Russian master Alexander Petrov, although it was a known opening well before his time, appearing in the work ofPedro Damianoaround the year 1500.
The move 2...Nf6 was long used as a drawing weapon when the player with the black pieces did not want to face the complexities that follow 2...Nc6. Although generally considered a respectable opening, it did not appear in a world chess championship until 1969 when GMTigran Petrosianmade a couple quick draws with it in a match he eventually lost to GMBoris Spassky.
About 50 years later, Caruana used it all three times he faced 1.e4 as Black in the2018 Candidates, and all three games were decisive including two wins. Caruana has also shown how White can beat the Petrov, as GMGreg Serperexplained inthis 2019 piece. Unless White is happy with a draw before the game even begins, the Petrov is nonetheless a strong opening for Black.


---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petrov%27s_Defence)
Petrov's Defenceor thePetrov Defence(also calledPetroff Defence,Petrov's Game,Russian Defence, orRussian Game–Russian:Русская партия) is achess openingcharacterised by the following moves:
Though thissymmetricalresponse has a long history, it was first popularised byAlexander Petrov, aRussianchessplayer in the mid-19th century. In recognition of the early investigations by the Russian masters Petrov andCarl Jaenisch, this opening is called the Russian Game in some countries.
The Petrov has a drawish reputation; however, it offers attacking opportunities for both sides, and a few lines are quitesharp. Often a trade occurs and Black, after gaining atempo, has a well-placedknight.Pillsbury's game in 1895[1]againstEmanuel Laskertestifies to this. The Black counterattack in thecentrealso avoids theRuy Lopez,Giuoco Piano(and other lines of theItalian Game), and theScotch Game. The Petrov has been adopted by many of the world's leading players, including world championsVasily Smyslov,Tigran Petrosian,Anatoly Karpov, andVladimir Kramnik, along withgrandmasterFabiano Caruanaand others.
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingscodes for Petrov's Defence are C43 (for 3.d4) and C42 (for all other lines).[2]
White's two main choices for move three are 3.Nxe5, theClassical Variationand 3.d4, theSteinitz Variation. 3.Nxe5 is more popular but they often lead to similar positions and "there is no clear reason to prefer one move over the other".[3]
3.Nc3 maytransposeto theFour Knights Gameor theThree Knights Game. 3.Bc4 may lead to theBoden–Kieseritzky Gambitor transpose to theTwo Knights Defence. Occasionally seen is thequiet3.d3.
After 3.Nxe5, the Classical Variation, by far the most popular move for Black is 3...d6. Black should not continue to copy White's moves with 3...Nxe4?!. After 4.Qe2 Black cannot play 4...Nf6??because 5.Nc6+ wins thequeen, and after 4...d5?! 5.d3 Qe7 6.dxe4 Qxe5 7.exd5 Black loses apawn.
Another common mistake is 4...d6, where after 5.Nxf7!Kxf7 6.Qxe4, Black has lost a pawn and the ability to castle.
Relatively best for Black is 4...Qe7 5.Qxe4 d6 6.d4 dxe5 7.dxe5 Nc6, and after for example 8.Nc3 (8.Bb5 is also good) 8...Qxe5 9.Qxe5+ Nxe5 10.Nb5 (or 10.Bf4) White has a clear advantage.[4][5]Also inferior for Black is 3...Qe7?! when 4.d4 d6 5.Nf3 Qxe4+ 6.Be2 gives White a large lead in development.
Most often, White follows the main line 3...d6 4.Nf3 Nxe4 5.d4 (5.Bd3!?is also playable, known as theMillennium Attack) d5 6.Bd3, where he will try to drive Black's advanced knight from e4 with moves like c4 and Re1. If White achieves this, then he is up two tempi (Nf6–e4–f6, plus the tempo White starts the game with). In practice White is usually able to achieve this, but at some structural cost such as having to play c4, which balances out.[6]White can also force simplification withLasker's 5.Qe2 Qe7 6.d3.  This is generally only good enough for adraw, which Black should be satisfied with.  Another possibility, explored byKeres, is 5.c4, known as theKauffmann Attack.
A completely different approach is to meet 4...Nxe4 with 5.Nc3 Nxc3 6.dxc3 with rapiddevelopmentandqueensidecastling. For instance, White can plan a quick Be3, Qd2, and 0-0-0, and play for akingsideattack, trusting that hisdoubledc-pawns will help protect his king, and that hisinitiativeand attacking potential will offset the longterm disadvantage of having doubled pawns. In the 5.Nc3 line, Black must avoid 5...Bf5?? 6.Qe2! which wins a piece due to thepin(if 6...Qe7 7.Nd5, forcing 7...Qd7 because of the threat to the c7-pawn; then 8.d3 wins the piece).Viswanathan Anandresigned after only six moves after falling for this againstAlonso Zapataat Biel in 1988.[7]
TheCochrane Gambit, 4.Nxf7, is labelled "speculative but entertaining" byNick de FirmianinModern Chess Openings(MCO) 14th edition. He evaluates the position inVeselin Topalov–Vladimir Kramnik,Linares 1999as offering chances for both sides after 4...Kxf7 5.Nc3 c5!? 6.Bc4+ Be6 7.Bxe6+ Kxe6 8.d4 Kf7 9.dxc5 Nc6.[8]
ThePaulsen Variation, 4.Nc4, is labelled "ineffective" by de Firmian inMCO, but is occasionally seen at grandmaster level. US master Andrew Karklins has experimented with 4.Nd3!?, now called theKarklins–Martinovsky Variation. This was played in theWorld Chess Championship 2018betweenMagnus CarlsenandFabiano Caruana.[9]
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 Nc6?!, recently dubbed theStafford Gambit, is considered dubious, but it sets a number oftraps, and in the early 2020s it became popular in online blitz and bullet games. After 4.Nxc6 dxc6, White wins a pawn but must play carefully. After 5.e5 (5.d3 is better) Ne4 6.d3?? (White should play 6.Nc3, 6.d4, or 6.Qe2) 6...Bc5! and White resigned in Lowens–Stafford, US correspondence game 1950.[10][11]After 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 Nc6 4.Nxc6 dxc6 5.d3 Bc5, White must avoid theLégal Trap6.Bg5?? Nxe4!, and if 7.Bxd8 (relatively best but still losing is 7.Be3) 7...Bxf2+ 8. Ke2 Bg4#. Instead White should play 6.Be2 Bc5 7.c3! with d3-d4 to follow, and Black has insufficient compensation for the pawn, though White must still play carefully.[12]

3.d4 was favoured byWilhelm Steinitz, and is sometimes called the Steinitz Variation, although it was known earlier. Black can capture either pawn; also possible is 3...d6, transposing into thePhilidor Defence.
After 3...exd4 4.e5 (4.Bc4 transposes into theUrusov Gambit) 4...Ne4 (4...Qe7?! 5.Be2 is better for White) 5.Qxd4 d5 6.exd6 Nxd6 7.Nc3 Nc6 8.Qf4 the game is approximatelyequal. After the other capture, 3...Nxe4, 4.Bd3 d5 (4...Nc6!? 5.Bxe4 d5, intending 6.Bd3 e4, is also possible) 5.Nxe5, when either 5...Nd7 or 5...Bd6 gives roughly equal chances.
A long and complicated tactical sequence which has frequently been seen in master games is 3...Nxe4 4.Bd3 d5 5.Nxe5 Bd6 6.0-0 0-0 7.c4 Bxe5 8.dxe5 Nc6 9.cxd5 Qxd5 10.Qc2 Nb4 11.Bxe4 Nxc2 12.Bxd5 Bf5 13.g4 Bxg4 14.Be4 Nxa1 15.Bf4 f5 16.Bd5+ Kh8 17.Rc1 c6 18.Bg2 Rfd8 19.Nd2 (diagram) and White has the slightly better endgame after either 19...Rxd2 20.Bxd2 Rd8 21.Bc3 Rd1+ 22.Rxd1 Bxd1 or 19...h6 20.h4.[13][14]
3.Nc3 is the Three Knights Game of Petrov's Defence. It can also be reached via 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.Nf3 (theVienna Game). Commonly, after 3...Nc6, the opening transposes to theFour Knights Game. With the reply 3...Bb4 (or some others), it remains the Three Knights Game proper.
3.Bc4 is the Italian Variation of Petrov's Defence. With 3...Nc6, it transposes to theTwo Knights Defence.
Another possibility is 3.Bc4 Nxe4 4.Nc3, the Boden–Kieseritzky Gambit. It is not considered wholly sound, since Black has several viable options. Black can accept the gambit with 4...Nxc3 5.dxc3 f6, but must play carefully after 6.0-0 (for example 6...Bc5?? 7.Nxe5! is disastrous; 6...d6 and 6...Nc6 are good). Another more aggressive try is 6.Nh4, where White goes for a quick assault on Black's king, but Black can maintain a small advantage if he plays cautiously via 6...g6 7.f4 Qe7 8.f5 Qg7 9.Qg4 Kd8.  Another possibility is returning the gambit pawn with 4...Nxc3 5.dxc3 c6 6.Nxe5 d5, which equalises. A third possibility is transposing to theItalian Four Knights Gamewith 4...Nc6, and if 5.Nxe4, 5...d5. If 5.Bxf7+?, then 5...Kxf7 6.Nxe4 d5 gives Black thebishop pairand control of thecentre. If 5.0-0, Black plays 5...Nxc3 6.dxc3 and now Black can play 6...Qe7!, after whichBobby Fischerwrote that "White has no compensation for the Pawn",[15]or 6...f6 transposing to the main line of the Boden–Kieseritzky. Black also has lines beginning 6...Be7 and 6...h6.

---

