---
layout: post
title:  "Queens Indian Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Queens Indian Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Queens-Indian-Defense)
The Queen's Indian Defense is a hypermodern opening for Black in response to White's 1.d4. When coupled with the Nimzo-Indian Defense, Black gets a complete defense against White's queen's pawn openings. A solid opening, the Queen's Indian is a reputable option for players who seek a "risk-free" game.
Players of all levels can play the Queen's Indian, although it is advisable to have a basic understanding of positional concepts before venturing into this opening. Players seeking to learn the Queen's Indian from the masters can study the games of none other than former world champion GMAnatoly Karpov.
The Queen's Indian Defense occurs after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6. In hypermodern style, Black refrains from immediately occupying the center with pawns and instead focuses on piece development. After White sidesteps the Nimzo-Indian Defense with 3.Nf3, Black plays 3...b6 to either fianchetto the queen's bishop or develop it to a6.
Black accepts less space for a solid position that still offers active chances. Black will usually try to exchange off one or two minor pieces to attenuate their problems with space. On the other hand, White can get an advantage if they successfully control the e4-square without making significant concessions.
There are many variations of the Queen's Indian Defense. Below you can see the main lines.
The Fianchetto Nimzowitsch Variation is the most played line of the Queen's Indian Defense and starts after1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.g3 Ba6. Black immediately puts pressure on the c4-pawn with their bishop. White's best response is to continue with 5.b3 to protect the pawn, and from there, the game can take many directions.
The Fianchetto Traditional Line starts after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.g3 Bb7. This line used to be the most popular way of playing the Queen's Indian and is still a good way to play the opening. Black usually manages to exchange a minor piece to alleviate their lack of space. White often plays de d4-d5 push to blunt Black's strong b7-bishop.
The Petrosian Variation occurs with the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.a3. This line is perhaps one of the sharpest ways for White to respond to the Queen's Indian. White invests a tempo with a2-a3 to safely develop their queen's knight to c3 without letting Black pin it with ...Bb4. White usually gets a mobile pawn center that helps in creating dangerous attacks.
The Kasparov Variation starts after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.Nc3. White develops the knight and accepts the possibility of transposing to the Nimzo-Indian Defense. White can also transpose into the Petrosian Variation, a strategy that GM Garry Kasparov himself preferred. If play continues in the Kasparov variation, players usually reach drawish positions with no weaknesses on either side.
The Spassky System starts with the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.e3. White prepares to develop their light-squared bishop and castle and usually develops their other bishop to b2. Closed positions are common in this line, with complex middlegames where piece maneuvering is essential for survival.
The Queen's Indian Defense was first deeply analyzed and developed byAron Nimzowitschand other hypermodernists at the beginning of the 21st century. The opening gained traction between the 1920s and 1930s when there was no doubt that the opening was a solid choice that still left room for Black to fight for a win.
The opening's solid reputation led many to believe that there was no way for White to gain a real advantage against it. This belief was likely part of the reason why interest in fighting against the Queen's Indian slowly decreased after the 1940s.
It wasn't until the 1980s that the opening surged in popularity once again. New ideas for White came to light, rekindling interest in the opening.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queen%27s_Indian_Defense)
TheQueen's Indian Defense[1](QID) is achess openingdefined by the moves:
The opening is a solid defense to theQueen's Pawn Game.[2]3...b6 increases Black's control over the central light squares e4 and d5 by preparing tofianchettothequeen's bishop, with the opening deriving its name from this maneuver. As in the otherIndian defenses, Black attempts to control thecenterwithpiecesinhypermodernstyle, instead of occupying it withpawnsin classical style.
By playing 3.Nf3, White sidesteps theNimzo-Indian Defensethat arises after 3.Nc3 Bb4. The Queen's Indian is regarded as the sister opening of the Nimzo-Indian, since both openings aim to impede White's efforts to gain full control of the center by playing e2–e4. Together, they are a well-respected response to 1.d4.
4. g3(ECOE15–E19) has long been White's most popular line against the Queen's Indian. It contests thelong diagonalby preparing to fianchetto the light-squared bishop. The standard response for Black through the 1970s was 4...Bb7, but 4...Ba6 has since become the topical line. A rarer third option is 4...Bb4+, which aims to exchange the less useful dark-squared bishop, though this line tends to leave Black with a slightly passive position.
White can defend the pawn at c4 with a piece by playing 5.Nbd2, 5.Qa4, 5.Qc2 or 5.Qb3, but these moves all diminish control of d4, making ...c7–c5 an effective reply for Black; therefore5. b3is White's most common response.[3]However, it weakens the dark squares slightly, which Black can take advantage of by playing5... Bb4+. Now 6.Nbd2?loses material after 6...Bc3 7.Rb1 Bb7 threatening 8...Be4, an opening trap which has ensnared players such asKamran Shirazi.[4]White's best move is therefore6. Bd2. However, after6... Be7 7. Bg2 c6Black is ready to play ...d7–d5, again attacking the c-pawn. If White plays cxd5 then ...cxd5 is considered toequalizefor Black. Thus White usually plays8. Bc3to clear the d2-square, and after8... d5White can play in two ways. After9. Nbd2 Nbd7 10. 0-0 0-0 11. Re1 c5Black has achieved his thematicpawn breakbefore White and the resulting position after12. e4 dxe4 13. Nxe4is equal. Therefore, the main line continues9. Ne5and since Black does not want White to maintain this knight on a strong central outpost, play continues9... Nfd7 10. Nxd7 Nxd7 11. Nd2 0-0 12. 0-0 Rc8 13. e4. By diverting the black knight on move 9 it is now White who has achieved his central pawn break first. The effect of Black's check 5...Bb4+ has been to lure White's bishop to c3 where it blocks the c-file. This, the current main line of the Queen's Indian, is considered equal bytheoryand became a frequent guest in grandmaster praxis in the 1980s.
After5. b3, Black also has several playable alternatives to 5...Bb4+, the most common of which is5... Bb7 6. Bg2 Bb4+ 7. Bd2 a5. When White plays Nc3, Black will exchange bishop for knight in order to enhance his control over the central light squares, and play on thequeensidewith moves such as ...a5–a4 and ...b5. Other possibilities for Black include 5...d5 and 5...b5.
More recently, several grandmasters, includingAlexander Beliavsky,Ni Hua,Veselin Topalov, andMagnus Carlsen, have played5. Qc2. The idea is to allow Black's counterthrust ...c5, the main line running5... Bb7 6. Bg2 c5. The fashion is for White to sacrifice a pawn with7. d5, gaining active play. This idea has scored well for White,[5]and new ideas have been cropping up since 2008.[6]The 5.Qc2 lines had previously scored poorly for White according to Emms.[3]
The classical main line of the Queen's Indian, the most frequently played line from the 1950s until 4...Ba6 became popular in the 1980s, usually continues:5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3 Ne4 8. Qc2 Nxc3 9. Qxc3. White has aspatial advantage, but Black has no weaknesses and can choose from a variety of ways to create counterplay, such as9... c5,9... f5or9... Be4. These lines are well known for theirdrawishtendencies and4... Bb7is nowadays often employed by Black as a drawing weapon. White has tried various deviations from the main line in an attempt to unbalance the play. These include:
The Petrosian Variation, prepares 5.Nc3 by stopping ...Bb4pinningtheknight. White intends to follow up with Nc3 and e4, building a large pawn center. Black usually responds by contesting the e4-square with ...Bb7 and ...d5. (See Gurevich, 1992, for an extensive analysis.) This variation was often used byGarry Kasparovearly in his career.
Black can choose between 4...Bb7 and 4...Bb4.
Preparing to develop theking's bishopand castlekingside, was also a favorite ofTigran Petrosian. This apparently quiet development may lead to complex middlegame play. Black usually replies 4...Bb7, then play may continue 5.Bd3 d5 6.0-0 or 5.Nc3 Bb4, transposing into the Nimzo-Indian Defence.
TheMilesVariation, which simply develops the bishop to a good square. Despite some success by its originator, this idea has never been popular.
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingsclassifies the Queen's Indian under codes E12 to E19 according to the following scheme:

---

