---
layout: post
title:  "Grunfeld Defense"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Grunfeld Defense
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Grunfeld-Defense)
The Grunfeld Defense is a cousin of the King's Indian Defense after1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3where Black strikes in the center with3...d5instead of playing 3...Bg7. In the King's Indian, Black is often playing for a kingside attack, while the Grunfeld is more confrontational in the center. White might get a central pawn mass, but Black plans to strike it down.
TheGrunfeld Defenseappears after the moves1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5.
The theme of any variation of the Grunfeld is White's center vs. Black's efforts to take it down. The two main variations are the Exchange and the Russian, but there are others worth knowing too.
The most popular and theoretically important Grunfeld is the Exchange Variation, which continues4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 6.bxc3. The simplest plan for Black, if White allows it, is to continue with ...c5, ...Nc6, ...Bg7, and sometimes ...Bg4 to pin the white knight to the queen, all of which put pressure on the d4 square. White usually seeks rapid development and active play to compensate, sometimes sacrificing the a-pawn.
This line is highly theoretical, which makes it more popular at the highest levels of chess.

The main alternative to 4.cxd5 for White is4.Nf3which Black usually follows with4...Bg7, after which White has three options. The Russian Variation is5.Qb3, protecting the c-pawn (5.e3is another popular move which does so, but blocks in the dark-squared bishop), adding to control of d5. Play continues5...dxc4 6.Qxc4with7.e4to follow, and White gets the big center, although Black can pester the queen and chip at that center with the moves ...a6, ...b5, and ...c5.
Instead of the Russian, White can play GMTigran V. Petrosian's move,5.Bg5, which is equally popular. The typical continuation is5...Ne4 6.cxd5 Nxg5 7.Nxg5 e6, where White gives up the two bishops but leads in development. White is also now able to defend the d-pawn with e3 while not blocking in the dark-squared bishop.
On move five White can also play5.Bf4, the Hungarian Attack, or the aforementioned5.e3, the Burille Variation.
White can also play4.Bf4on move four, the Brinckmann Attack, where play usually continues4...Bg7 5.e3 O-O. This continuation is called the Grunfeld Gambit because White can win a pawn, but usually only temporarily, as in the continuation below.
4.Bg5on move four, the Stockholm Variation, is essentially a gambit for White with the usual continuation4...Ne4 5.Bh4 Nxc3 6.bxc3 dxc4 7.e3 Be6.
4.Qb3is the Accelerated Russian but usually transposes to the standard Russian.
The rare Zaitsev Gambit,4.h4, scores 48% for White in just over 100 games.
It is also worth noting that, because the Exchange Variation of the Grunfeld has a good reputation for Black, White sometimes makes third moves besides 3.Nc3 to avoid it. When Black replies 3...d5 anyway, these are called "Neo-Grunfelds". The three main alternative third moves for White are3.Nf3,3.f3, and3.g3.
Most of Black's control over the course of the game is over right after 3...d5, with White's setup determining action from there. It's still significant; the Grunfeld is safer for Black than the King's Indian, giving up the occasional win in order to draw more and lose less. Per 100 games, Black scores +27 -36 =36 with 3...d5 compared to +29 -43 =28 with 3...Bg7.
And at the same time, because 3...d5 is such a committal move, most of White's responses score similarly. The percentages are identical for 4.cxd5 and 4.Nf3 (37% for White, 27% for Black, 36% drawn), moves which represent three-quarters of all Grunfeld games. The Accelerated Russian Variation (45% win rate for White) and the Zaitsev Gambit (48%) score better, but represent only a small fraction of games.
White's best chance is potentially the anti-Grunfeld move 3.f3, 3500 games winning 44% of the time. In some ways, a Grunfeld player has already obtained all their goals after 3.Nc3 d5.
The Grunfeld Defense is named for GM Ernst Grunfeld, a leading opening theorist of his day. He began playing it in several games in 1922, including a win overAlexander Alekhinewith it in Vienna (which apparently made enough of an impression on Alekhine that he tried it himself in the same tournament, only to lose in 26 moves).
It wasEfim Bogoljubovagainst Alekhine who introduced the Grunfeld to world championship play in 1929, but he only scored =1 -2. In 1935, Alekhine played it vs. Euwe and managed just +1 -3. In fact, the Grunfeld has scored surprisingly poorly in world championship play, but that is just one event. It has been respected for almost a century and no less a player than GMGarry Kasparovwas a longtime practitioner. Several other top grandmasters use it to this day.
One of the most famous games in chess history, especially in the United States, was 13-year-old future GMBobby Fischer's "Game of the Century" over IM Donald Byrne in 1956. The game did not start as a Grunfeld but transposed into one on Fischer's 5...d5, and the prodigy went on to sacrifice his queen in one of the greatest attacks ever played on a chess board.
GMAlexei Shirovdefeated GMVeselin Topalovwith the Black side of a Grunfeld at the 1998 Linares tournament. The game is best-known for its ending, however, andShirov's astounding 47th move.
[GMGarry Kasparovplayed almost every opening he tried well, but especially the Grunfeld. Watch him at the peak of his powers, dismantling the great GMAlexander Beliavskyin 1988.
As he demonstrated in games like that one,] Kasparov was a longtime expert in the Grunfeld. That made it all the more shocking when GMVladimir Kramnikdefeated him in the second game of their world championship match in 2000, a match Kramnik went on to win.

The Grunfeld is one of the more active ways for Black to meet 1.d4, although it requires good theoretical knowledge to play well. Find out about more moves and approaches in ourChess.com Explorer.

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gr%C3%BCnfeld_Defence)
TheGrünfeld Defenceis achess openingcharacterised by the moves:
Black offers White the possibility of 4.cxd5, which may be followed by 4...Nxd5 and 5.e4, giving White an imposingcentral pawnduo. If White does not take the d5-pawn, Black may eventually play ...dxc4, when a White response of e4 again leads to the samepawn structure. In classical opening theory this imposingpawn centrewas held to give White a large advantage, but thehypermodernschool, which was coming to the fore in the 1920s, held that a large pawn centre could be a liability rather than an asset. The Grünfeld is therefore a key hypermodern opening, showing in stark terms how a large pawn centre can either be a powerful battering ram or a target for attack.
The first instance of this opening is in an 1855 game byMoheschunder Bannerjee, an Indian player who had transitioned fromIndian chessrules, playing Black againstJohn Cochranein Calcutta, in May 1855:
and Whitematesin three (19.Nh6+double checkKh8 20.Qg8+ Rxg8 21.Nf7#).[1][2]Cochrane published a book reporting his games with Moheshchunder and other Indians in 1864.
It gained popularity afterErnst Grünfeldintroduced it into international play at the Bad Pistyan Tournament 7-28 April 1922, where, in his first game with the defense, he drewFriedrich Sämischin 22 moves.[3]Later the same year on November 18, 1922,Ernst Grünfelddefeated future world championAlexander Alekhinein Vienna in 55 moves.[4]Grünfeld usually employed a very classical style. The defence was later adopted by a number of prominent players, includingVasily Smyslov,Viktor Korchnoi,Leonid SteinandBobby Fischer.Garry Kasparovoften used the defence, including in hisWorld Championshipmatches againstAnatoly Karpovin 1986, 1987 and 1990, andVladimir Kramnikin 2000. Currently active notable players who employ the opening includeMagnus Carlsen,Maxime Vachier-Lagrave,Loek van Wely,Peter Svidler,Peter Leko,Viswanathan Anand,Luke McShane,Ian NepomniachtchiandGata Kamsky.[5]Anand employed it twice in theWorld Chess Championship 2010. In theWorld Chess Championship 2012between Anand andBoris Gelfand, each player used the Grünfeld once with both games ending in draws. Anand faced the Grünfeld againstMagnus Carlsenduring the first game of theWorld Chess Championship 2014and drew in a Rook and Queen ending.
TheGame of the CenturybetweenDonald Byrneand 13-year-old Bobby Fischer on October 17, 1956, featured this opening, although arriving in the Grünfeld via atranspositionof moves (using 1.Nf3 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.d4 0-0 5.Bf4 d5).
The main line of the Grünfeld, theExchange Variation(ECOcodes D85–D89), is defined by the continuation 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4. Now White has an imposing looking centre – and the main continuation 5...Nxc3 6.bxc3 strengthens it still further. Black generally attacks White's centre with ...c5 and ...Bg7, often followed by moves such as ...Qa5, ...cxd4, ...Bg4 and ...Nc6. White often uses their big centre to launch an attack against Black's king. One subvariation, frequently played by Karpov, including four games of his 1987 world championship match against Kasparov inSeville, Spain, is the Seville Variation, after 6...Bg7 7.Bc4 c5 8.Ne2 Nc6 9.Be3 0-0 10.0-0 Bg4 11.f3 Na5 12.Bxf7+, long thought a poor move by theory, as the resultant dark-square weakness had been believed to give Black more than enoughcompensationfor the pawn.
White candeveloptheir pieces in a number of ways in the Exchange Variation. For decades, theory held that the correct method of  development was with Bc4 and Ne2, often followed by 0-0 and f4–f5, playing for a central breakthrough or kingside attack. It was generally thought that an early Nf3 was weak in the Exchange Variation because it allowed Black too much pressure on the centre with ...Bg4. In the late 1970s, however, Karpov, Kasparov and others found different methods to play the Exchange Variation with White, often involving an early Rb1 to remove the rook from the sensitive a1–h8 diagonal, as well as attempting to hinder the development of Black'squeenside. Another, relatively recently developed system involves quickly playing Be3, Qd2 and Rc1 or Rd1 to fortify White's centre, remove White's rook from the diagonal and possibly enable an early d5 push by White.
Vladimir KramnikandBoris Gelfandare the leading practitioners as White, andĽubomír Ftáčnikhas had many fine results with the black pieces.[5]
In bringing more pressure to bear against Black's central outpost on d5, White practically forces ...dxc4, thus gaining a central preponderance; however, in return, their queen will often be exposed as Black's queenside play unfolds in the middlegame. After 5...dxc4 6.Qxc4 0-0 7.e4 Black has several primary options:
The Hungarian Variation, 7...a6, has been championed byPeter Leko.
Named afterVasily Smyslov, 7...Bg4 8.Be3 Nfd7 was a topical line from the 1950s through the mid-1970s.
7...Na6 isLodewijk Prins's idea, which Kasparov favoured in several of his World Championship matches against Karpov.[6]
This line is commonly seen in recent games.[7]After 7...Nc6, White will most commonly play 8.Be2, followed by 8...e5! 9.d5 Nd4 10.Nxd4 exd4 11.Qxd4. A pawn sacrifice to develop Black's pieces and generate active counterplay.
7...c6, 7...b6
In this line, favoured byYasser Seirawan, after the nearly universal 5...Ne4, White plays 6.Bh4 or 6.cxd5, with Black then opting for either 6...Nxc3 7.bxc3 dxc4 or 6...Nxg5 7.Nxg5 e6. In the latter case, 7...c6 is sometimes tried. 6.Nxd5?grabbing the pawn loses a piece after 6...Nxg5 7.Nxg5 e6. After 6.cxd5 Nxg5 7.Nxg5 e6, White has 8.Qd2 exd5 9.Qe3+, with attacking chances (though the interpolation 8...h6 9.Nf3 exd5 is a significant alternative), or the more usual 8.Nf3 exd5 after which play generally proceeds on lines analogous to theQueen's Gambit Declined, Exchange Variation, with a queenside minority attack by White (b2–b4–b5xc6), as Black aims for their traditional kingside play with f7–f5–f4 and, in this case, g6–g5.
For players who do not wish to take on the complexities of the Exchange Variation, the move 4.Bf4 is generally considered a safer continuation for White.[8]White opts for the initiative on the queenside with a smaller pawn centre. In the main line (D82), play proceeds with 4...Bg7 5.e3 c5 6.dxc5 Qa5, with White's choices at their seventh move being cxd5, Qb3, Qa4, or Rc1. Despite its reputation, instatistical databasesthis variation shows only a slightly higher percentage of White wins and draws, as opposed to the Exchange Variation.[9][10]The variation is not often met in top-flight play today, its usage having declined significantly since its heyday in the 1930s.[11][better source needed]
In this variation, play may also continue 4.Bf4 Bg7 5.e3 0-0, which is known as theGrünfeld Gambit(ECOcode D83). White can accept the gambit by playing 6.cxd5 Nxd5 7.Nxd5 Qxd5 8.Bxc7, or decline it with 6.Qb3 or 6.Rc1, to which Black responds with 6...c5.
Systems in which White delays the development Nc3 are known as theNeo-Grünfeld Defence(ECOcode D70–D79); typical move orders are 1.d4 Nf6 2.g3 g6 3.c4 d5 or, more commonly, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.g3 d5 (the latter is known as the Kemeri Variation).
Apart from the above, among the more popular continuations are:
Smyslov vs. Fischer, Herceg Novi Blitz Tournament, 1970:1.c4 g6 2.g3 Bg7 3.Bg2 Nf6 4.Nf3 0-0 5.0-0 c6 6.d4 d5 7.cxd5 cxd5 8.Nc3 Ne4 9.Qb3 Nc6 10.Be3 Na5 11.Qd1 Nxc3 12.bxc3 b6 13.Ne5 Ba6 14.Re1 Rc8 15.Bd2 e6 16.e4 Bb7 17.exd5 Bxd5 18.Bxd5 Qxd5 19.Qe2 Rfd8 20.Ng4 Nc4 21.Bh6 f5 22.Bxg7 Kxg7 23.Ne3 Nxe3 24.Qxe3 Rc6 25.Rac1 Rdc8 26.c4 Rxc4 27.Rxc4 Rxc4 28.Qxe6 Qxe6 29.Rxe6 Kf7 30.Re3 Rxd4 31.Ra3 a5 32.Rc3 Ke6 33.Kg2 Kd6 34.h4 Ra4 35.Rc2 b5 36.Kf3 b4 37.Ke3 Kd5 38.f3 Ra3+ 39.Kf4 a4 40.g4 fxg4 41.fxg4 b3 42.axb3 axb3 43.Rc7 Ra4+ 44.Kg5 Rb4 45.Rc1 Kd4 46.Kh6 Rb70–1[12]

---

