---
layout: post
title:  "Kings Gambit"
categories: jekyll update
---

## Kings Gambit
# Content [from](https://www.chess.com/openings/Kings-Gambit)
TheKing's Gambitis an age-old aggressive opening that Romantic chess players revered. Largely employed by top players for more than 300 years, this opening leads to open games that are exciting and, in most cases, decisive.
With the rise of engines and computer analysis, top players have virtually abandoned the King's Gambit in high-stakes games because of its risky nature. However, tactical players who enjoy sharp games can still employ this opening to play for a fabulous (and usually sacrificial) attack to win the game in style.
TheKing's Gambithappens after1.e4 e5 2.f4and it's the fourth most popular move after Black plays 1...e5. White's idea is to gambit a pawn to build a strong center after diverting Black's e5-pawn to f4. If Black accepts the pawn sacrifice, White has two main plans: attack the weak f7-square or play d2-d4 and develop their pieces to active squares.

After the game enters the King's Gambit with2.f4, Black can accept or decline the pawn sacrifice. Below are the four main lines, two of them taking the pawn and the other two ignoring it.
The most popular way to play is to accept the gambit with2...exf4. After that, White's main move is to play3.Nf3, entering theKing's Knight's Gambitline. White stops Black from playing Qh4 with check and starts developing the kingside. Usually, White will try to quickly castle and apply pressure on the f7-square using the light-squared bishop, knight, and the open f-file.
Another line after Black accepts the pawn is to play4.Bc4and enter theBishop's Gambit, a variation preferred by GMBobby Fischer. This move allows Black to play Qh4+, forcing the white king to f1. White will accept that to later play Nf3, gaining a tempo on the black queen. From there, White usually tries to build a strong center and go on the offensive.
TheFalkbeer Countergambitis the most popular way to decline the King's Gambit. The game enters this line after1.e4 e5 2.f4 d5. Black strikes at the center immediately instead of taking White's wing pawn.
TheKing's Gambit Declined: Classical Variationoccurs after1.e4 e5 2.f4 Bc5, with Black developing the dark-squared bishop to a dangerous diagonal. With this line, Black refuses to play the crazy games that would unfold after accepting the gambit. The bishop on c5 does a good job preventing the white king from castling kingside, keeping the it exposed.
One of the disadvantages of the King's Gambit is that Black has many ways of playing against it. Any player who knows theory can get good positions with Black by "defusing" the gambit whether they decide to accept or decline it.
If you want to respond to White's aggressive opening by escalating the aggression, you can opt for theFalkbeer Countergambit. As stated above, it arises after1.e4 e5 2.f4 d5. Black's idea is to open up the center and explore the weakness White created around their king after the f2-f4 push.
This variation became famous after Fischer published an article titled "A Bust to the King's Gambit." If you want to accept the gambit and White chooses to develop the g1-knight, this is a great way to get a good position. The variation goes1.e4 e5 2.f4 exf4 3.Nf3 d6, and Black will usually play the g7-g5 push to keep the f4-pawn or build pressure on the kingside. With 381 games in our database, White wins 35%, draws 15%, and Black wins 50%.
After accepting the gambit, White can develop the light-squared bishop before the knight. For this line, theCozio Variationscores well. After1.e4 e5 2.f4 exf4 3.Bc4 Qh4+ 4.Kf1 d6, White can no longer castle. From this position, White wins 28% of the games, draws 21%, and Black wins 52%.

The oldest record of the King's Gambit comes from a 1560 game betweenRuy Lopez de Seguraand Giovani Leonardo Da Cutri. The opening never fell out of fashion among European players, and in the early 1600s, the prominentGioachino Grecoadopted the opening and developed a significant theory on it.
In the 1800s, the opening became extremely popular, with many of the best players of their time playing it. Players likeAlexander McDonnell,Howard Staunton,Paul Morphy,Adolf Anderssen, and many others had the King's Gambit as an integral part of their arsenal.
The King's Gambit began losing its popularity around the beginning of the 1900s. At that time, players' knowledge of positional and defensive concepts was significantly higher than in the previous centuries, making it harder for White to gain a significant advantage from the opening.
By the middle of the 20th century, few of the elite players still relied on the King's Gambit in high-stakes games. In 1961, Fischer wrote the famous article "A Bust to the King's Gambit," giving even more traction to the "movement" against the opening.
Nowadays, the King's Gambit is rare in high-level games. However, players like GMsGarry Kasparov,Ian Nepomniachtchi, andMagnus Carlsenhave played this aggressive opening in shorter time controls.
The Romantic Era of chess has plenty of examples of games with the King's Gambit. You can also find examples of this opening in more recent games from strong players like GMDavid Bronsteinand even world champions like GMsBoris Spasskyand Fischer. Below you can see two famous games with the King's Gambit:
Anderssen vs. Lionel Kieseritzky - The Immortal Game
Spassky vs. Bronstein
You now know what the King's Gambit is, how to play it, its main lines, how to play against it, and more. Head over to ourMaster Gamesdatabase to check out master games using this opening to learn more about it!

---

# Content [from](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King%27s_Gambit)

TheKing's Gambitis achess openingthat begins with the moves:
White offers apawnto divert the black e-pawn. If Black accepts thegambit, White may play d4 and Bxf4, regaining the gambit pawn withcentraldomination, or direct their forces against the weak square f7 with moves such as Nf3, Bc4, 0-0, and g3. A downside to the King's Gambit is that it weakens White's king's position, exposing it to the latent threat of ...Qh4+ (or...Be7–h4+), which may force White to give upcastlingrights.
The King's Gambit is one of the oldest documented openings, appearing in one of the earliest chess books,Luis Ramírez de Lucena'sRepetición de Amores y Arte de Ajedrez(1497).[1]It was examined by the 17th-century Italian chess playerGiulio Cesare Polerio.[2]The King's Gambit was one of the most popular openings until the late 19th century, when improvements in defensive technique led to its decline in popularity. It is infrequently seen atmasterlevel today, as Black has several methods to obtainequality, but is still popular at amateur level.
The King's Gambit was one of the most popular openings for over 300 years, and has been played by many of the strongest players in many of the greatestbrilliancies, including theImmortal Game. Nevertheless, players have held widely divergent views on it.François-André Danican Philidor(1726–1795), the greatest player andtheoristof his day, wrote that the King's Gambit should end in adrawwithbest playby both sides, stating that "a gambit equally well attacked and defended is never a decisive [game], either on one side or the other."[3]Writing over 150 years later,Siegbert Tarrasch, one of the world's strongest players in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, pronounced the opening "a decisive mistake" and wrote that "it is almost madness to play the King's Gambit."[4]Similarly, futureworld championBobby Fischerwrote a famous article, "A Bust to the King's Gambit", in which he stated, "In my opinion the King's Gambit is busted. It loses by force" and offered hisFischer Defense(3...d6) as a refutation.[5][6]FMGraham Burgess, in his bookThe Mammoth Book of Chess, noted the discrepancy between the King's Gambit andWilhelm Steinitz's accumulation theory. Steinitz had argued that an attack is only justified when a player has an advantage, and an advantage is only obtainable after the opponent makes a mistake. Since 1...e5 does not look like a blunder, White should therefore not be launching an attack.[7]
While the King's Gambit Accepted was a staple of Romantic era chess, the opening began to decline with the development of opening theory and improvements in defensive technique in the late 19th century. By the 1920s, 1.e4 openings declined in popularity with the rise of thehypermodernschool, with many players switching to 1.d4 and 1.c4 openings andpositional play. After World War II, 1.e4 openings became more popular again, withDavid Bronsteinbeing the firstgrandmasterin decades to use the King's Gambit in serious play. He inspiredBoris Spasskyto also take up the King's Gambit, although Spassky was not willing to risk using the opening in any of his World Championship matches. Spassky did beat many strong players with it, however, including Bobby Fischer,[8]Zsuzsa Polgar,[9]and a famousbrilliancyagainst Bronstein himself.[10]
In 2012, anApril Fools' Dayprank byChessbasein association withVasik Rajlich—inventor of chess engineRybka—claimed to have proven to a 99.99999999% certainty that the King's Gambit is at best a draw for White, but only after 3.Be2.[11][12]Revealing the prank, Rajlich admitted that current computer technology is nowhere near solving such a task.[13]
The King's Gambit is rare in modern high-level play.[14]The main reason is that it is hard to gain an opening advantage with White against strong opponents, with GMMatthew Sadleronce joking that the dream of every King's Gambit player is a "worse but holdable ending".[15]A handful of grandmasters have continued to use it, includingJoseph Gallagher,Hikaru Nakamura,Baskaran Adhiban,Nigel Short, andAlexei Fedorov, albeit never as a main weapon.
Although Black usually accepts the gambit pawn, two methods of declining the gambit—theClassical Defense(2...Bc5) and theFalkbeer Countergambit(2...d5)—are also popular. After2...exf4, the two main continuations for White are 3.Nf3 (King's Knight's Gambit) and 3.Bc4 (Bishop's Gambit).
This is the most popular move. It develops theknightand prevents 3...Qh4+. Black's two main approaches are to attempt to hold on to the pawn with ...g5, or to return the pawn in order to facilitatedevelopment.
The Classical Variation arises after 3.Nf3 g5. Black defends the f4-pawn, and threatens to kick the f3-knight with ...g4, or else to consolidate with ...Bg7 and ...h6. The main continuations traditionally have been 4.h4 and 4.Bc4. More recently, 4.Nc3 (the Quaade Gambit or Quaade Attack)[16]has been recommended by Scottish grandmaster (GM)John Shawas a less explored alternative to 4.h4 and superior to 4.Bc4.[17]
With 4.h4 White practically forces 4...g4, thereby undermining any attempt by Black to set up a stable pawn chain with ...h6 and ...Bg7.
TheKieseritzky Gambit, 4.h4 g4 5.Ne5, is considered by modern writers such as Shaw and Gallagher to be the main line after 3...g5. It was popularized byLionel Kieseritzkyin the 1840s and used successfully byWilhelm Steinitz.Boris Spasskyused it to beatBobby Fischerin a famous game atMar del Platain 1960.[18]The main line of the Kieseritzky Gambit is considered to be 5...Nf6 6.Bc4 d5 7.exd5 Bd6 8.d4 with an unclear position. The Long Whip Variation, 5...h5?! 6.Bc4 Rh7 (or 6...Nh6) is considered old-fashioned and risky, as Black loses a lot of time attempting to hold on to the pawn.
4.h4 g4 5.Ng5 is theAllgaierGambit,[19]intending 5...h6 6.Nxf7. This knight sacrifice is considered unsound.[20]
The extremelysharpMuzio Gambit[21]arises after 4.Bc4 g4 5.0-0 gxf3 6.Qxf3, where White has sacrificed a knight but has three pieces bearing down on f7.[22]Such wild play is rare in modern chess, but Black must defend accurately. Perhaps the sharpest continuation is the Double Muzio after 6...Qf6 7.e5 Qxe5 8.Bxf7+!?, leaving White two pieces down in eight moves, but with a position that some masters consider to be equal.[23][24]In practice White's play seems to be easier, especially when the opponent is surprised by such daring tactics.
Similar lines are theGhulam KassimGambit, 4.Bc4 g4 5.d4, and theMcDonnell Gambit, 4.Bc4 g4 5.Nc3. These are generally considered inferior to the Muzio, which has the advantage of reinforcing White's attack along the f-file. Also inferior is theLolliGambit 4.Bc4 g4 5.Bxf7+?!, which leaves White with insufficientcompensationfor the piece after 5...Kxf7 6.Ne5+ Ke8 7.Qxg4 Nf6 8.Qxf4 d6.
TheSalvioGambit, 4.Bc4 g4 5.Ne5 Qh4+ 6.Kf1, is considered better for Black due to the insecurity of White's king. Black may play safely with 6...Nh6 (Silberschmidt Variation), or counter-sacrifice with 6...f3 (CochraneGambit) or 6...Nc6 (Viennese Variation).
A safer alternative to 4...g4 is 4...Bg7,[23]which usually leads to the Hanstein Gambit after 5.d4 d6 6.0-0 h6 or the Philidor Gambit after 5.h4 h6 6.d4 d6 (other move orders are possible in both cases).
The Quaade Gambit (3.Nf3 g5 4.Nc3) is named after a Danish amateur who discussed it in correspondence with theDeutsche Schachzeitungin the 1880s.[25]The move has received renewed attention following its recommendation by John Shaw in his 2013 book on the King's Gambit. A well-known trap here is 4...g4 5.Ne5 Qh4+ 6.g3 fxg3 7.Qxg4 g2+?(7...Qxg4 8.Nxg4 d5 is about equal) 8.Qxh4 gxh1=Q 9.Qh5!and White is close to winning. (Black's best defense is considered 9...Nh6 10.d4 d6 11.Bxh6 dxe5 12.Qxe5+ Be6 13.Qxh8 Nd7 14.Bxf8 0-0-0 and White will emerge a clear pawn ahead.) Instead, 4...Bg7 has been recommended. 4...d6 and 4...h6 transpose to Fischer's Defense and Becker's Defense, respectively. Also possible is 4...Nc6, recommended byKonstantin Sakaev.[26][27]
After 4...Bg7 5.d4 g4,Simon Williamsadvocates 6.Bxf4 gxf3 in his DVD andChess.comvideo series.[28]White is down a knight, but has a strong attack. The Quaade Gambit has recently been advocated byDaniel Kingin his PowerPlay series for Chessbase.
This is likely to lead to similar positions to the Quaade Gambit; however, 4...g4 5.Ne5 Qh4+ 6.g3 fxg3 7.Qxg4 g2+!? (7...Qxg4=) is now viable due to the threat against the pawn on e4. After 8.Qxh4 gxh1=Q Shaw recommends 9.Nc3 for White, with a complicated position.[29]
TheBeckerDefense (3.Nf3 h6), has the idea of creating apawn chainon h6, g5, f4 to defend the f4 pawn while avoiding the Kieseritzky Gambit, so Black will not be forced to play ...g4 when White plays to undermine the chain with h4. White has the option of 4.b3, although the main line continues with 4.d4 g5 (ECOC37) and usually transposes to lines of the Classical Variation after 5.Bc4 Bg7 6.0-0 (ECOC38).
The rarely seen Bonch-Osmolovsky Defense[30](3.Nf3 Ne7) aims to defend the f4-pawn with ...Ng6, a relatively safe square for the knight compared to the Schallopp Defense. It was played byMark Bluvshteinto defeat former world title finalistNigel ShortatMontreal2007,[31]even though it has never been highly regarded by theory.
TheCunninghamDefense (3.Nf3 Be7) threatens a check on h4 that can permanently prevent White from castling; furthermore, if White does not immediately develop the king's bishop, Ke2 would be forced, which hems the bishop in. A sample line is 4.Nc3 Bh4+ 5.Ke2 d5 6.Nxd5 Nf6 7.Nxf6+ Qxf6 8.d4 Bg4 9.Qd2 (diagram). White has strong central control with pawns on d4 and e4, while Black is relying on the white king's discomfort to compensate.
To avoid having to play Ke2, 4.Bc4 is White's most popular response.[32]Black can play 4...Bh4+ anyway, forcing 5.Kf1 (or else the wildBertinGambit or Three Pawns' Gambit, 5.g3 fxg3 6.0-0 gxh2+ 7.Kh1, played in the nineteenth century). In modern practice, it is more common for Black to simply develop instead with 4...Nf6 5.e5 Ng4, known as the Modern Cunningham. An under-explored but seemingly playable line here is 5...Ne4!?, theEuweVariation, which has a number of trappy ideas.
TheSchalloppDefense (3.Nf3 Nf6) is usually played with the intention of holding on to the pawn after 4.e5 Nh5. While it is not Black's most popular option, it attracted some attention in 2020 whenDing Lirenused it to beat Magnus Carlsen in the onlineMagnus Carlsen Invitationaltournament. The undefended knight on h5 means Black must be careful: for example 4.e5 Nh5 5.d4 d6 6.Qe2 Be7? (correct is 6...d5!=) 7.exd6 Qxd6 8.Qb5+ wins the h5-knight.[33]
The Modern Defense, orAbbaziaDefense,[34](3.Nf3 d5) has much the same idea as the Falkbeer Countergambit, and can in fact be reached via transposition, i.e. 2...d5 3.exd5 exf4 4.Nf3. Black concentrates on gaining piece play and fighting for theinitiativerather than keeping the extra pawn. It has been recommended by several publications as an easy way to equalize, although White's extra central pawn and piece activity gives a slight advantage. If White captures (4.exd5) then Black may play 4...Nf6 or recapture with 4...Qxd5, at which point it becomes theScandinavianVariation ofKGA. This variation was considered most critical in the past, but recent trends seem to indicate a slight advantage for White.
"The refutation of any gambit begins with accepting it. In my opinion the King's Gambit is busted. It loses by force." — R. Fischer, "A Bust to the King's Gambit"
The Fischer Defense (3.Nf3 d6), although previously known, was advocated byBobby Fischerafter he was defeated byBoris Spasskyin a Kieseritzky Gambit at the 1960Mar del Plata tournament. Fischer then decided to refute the King's Gambit, and the next year theAmerican Chess Quarterlypublished Fischer's analysis of 3...d6, which he called "a high-class waiting move".[5][6]
The point is that after 4.d4 g5 5.h4 g4 White cannot continue with 6.Ne5 as in the Kieseritzky Gambit, 6.Ng5 is unsound because of 6...f6!trapping the knight, and 6.Nfd2 blocks the bishop on c1. This leaves the move 6.Ng1 as the only option, when after six moves neither side has developed a piece. The resulting slightly odd position (diagram) offers White good attacking chances. A typical continuation is 6.Ng1 Bh6 7.Ne2 Qf6 8.Nbc3 c6 9.g3 f3 10.Nf4 Qe7 with an unclear position (Korchnoi/Zak).
The main alternative to 4.d4 is 4.Bc4. Play usually continues 4...h6 5.d4 g5 6.0-0 Bg7, transposing into the Hanstein Gambit, which can also be reached via 3...g5 or 3...h6.
The MacLeod Defense, 3...Nc6, is named afterNicholas MacLeod.Joe Gallagherwrites that 3.Nf3 Nc6 "has never really caught on, probably because it does nothing to address Black's immediate problems." Like Fischer's Defense, it is awaiting move.[35]An obvious drawback is that the knight on c6 may prove a target for the d-pawn later in the opening.
An invention of the Hungarian/English player, János Wagenbach.John Shawwrites: "If given the time, Black intends to seal up the kingside with ...h4 followed by ...g5, securing the extra pawn on f4 without allowing an undermining h2–h4. The drawback is of course the amount of time required".[36]
Of the alternatives to 3.Nf3, the most important is the Bishop's Gambit, 3.Bc4. White allows 3...Qh4+ 4.Kf1, losing the right to castle, but this loses time for Black after the inevitable Nf3 and White will develop rapidly. White also has the option of delaying Nf3, however, and can instead play g3!?, after which the game becomes quite sharp, with White having the option of Qf3 with an attack on f7, or Kg2 threatening hxg3. This idea is advocated, among others, by GMSimon Williams.[37]
Korchnoi and Zak recommend as best for Black 3...Nf6 4.Nc3 c6, or the alternative move order 3...c6 4.Nc3 Nf6. After 5.Bb3 d5 6.exd5 cxd5 7.d4 Bd6 8.Nge2 0-0 9.0-0 g5 10.Nxd5 Nc6, Black was somewhat better in Spielmann–Bogoljubow, Märisch Ostrau 1923.[38]
Black's other main option is 3...d5, returning the pawn immediately. Play might continue 3...d5 4.Bxd5 Nf6 5.Nc3 Bb4 6.Nf3 Bxc3 7.dxc3 c6 8.Bc4 Qxd1+ 9.Kxd1 0-0 10.Bxf4 Nxe4 with an equal position (Bilguer Handbuch, Korchnoi/Zak).
3...Nc6!?, Maurian Defense, is relatively untested, but if White plays 4.Nf3 Black can transpose into the Hanstein Gambit after 4...g5 5.d4 Bg7 6.c3 d6 7.0-0 h6 (Neil McDonald, 1998). John Shaw wrote that 3...Nc6 is a "refutation" of the Bishop's Gambit, as he says that Black is better in all variations.
Steinitz's 3...Ne7 and thecountergambit3...f5 (best met by 4.Qe2!) are generally considered inferior.
Other 3rd moves for White are rarely played. Some of these are:
Black can decline the offered pawn, or offer acountergambit.
The Falkbeer Countergambit is named after the 19th-centuryAustrianmasterErnst Falkbeer. It runs 1.e4 e5 2.f4 d5 3.exd5 e4, in which Blacksacrificesa pawn in return for quick and easy development. It was once considered good for Black and scored well, but White obtains some advantage with the response 4.d3!, and the line fell out of favor after the 1930s.
A more modern interpretation of the Falkbeer is 2...d5 3.exd5 c6!?, as advocated byAron Nimzowitsch. Black is not concerned about pawns and aims for earlypieceactivity. White has a better pawn structure and prospects of a betterendgame. The main line continues 4.Nc3 exf4 5.Nf3 Bd6 6.d4 Ne7 7.dxc6 Nbxc6, giving positions analogous to the Modern Variation of the gambit accepted.
A common way to decline the gambit is with 2...Bc5, the "classical"KGD. The bishop prevents White fromcastlingand is such a nuisance that White often expends twotempito eliminate it by means of Nc3–a4, to exchange on c5 or b6, after which White may castle without worry. It also contains an opening trap for novices: if White continues with 3.fxe5??Black continues 3...Qh4+, in which either therookis lost (4.g3 Qxe4+,forkingthe rook andking) or White ischeckmated(4.Ke2 Qxe4#). This line often comes about bytranspositionfrom lines of theVienna GameorBishop's Opening, when White plays f2–f4 before Nf3.
One rarely seen line is the Rotlewi Countergambit:[42]3.Nf3 d6 4.b4!?. The idea of the gambit is similar to that seen in theEvans Gambitof theItalian Game. White sacrifices a pawn to try and build a strong center with 4...Bxb4 5.c3 Bc5 (or 5...Ba5) 6.fxe5 dxe5 7.d4. This line is considered slightly dubious, however.
Other options in the KGD are possible, though unusual, such as the Adelaide Countergambit 2...Nc6 3.Nf3 f5, advocated byTony Miles; 2...d6, which is the way the King’s Gambit was declined the first known time it was played,[43]when after 3.Nf3, best is 3...exf4 transposing to theFischer Defense(though 2...d6 invites White to play 3.d4 instead); and 2...Nf6 3.fxe5 Nxe4 4.Nf3 Ng5! 5.d4 Nxf3+ 6.Qxf3 Qh4+ 7.Qf2 Qxf2+ 8.Kxf2 with a small endgame advantage, as played in the 1968 game betweenBobby FischerandBob WadeinVinkovci.[44]The greedy 2...Qf6 (known as theNordwaldeVariation), intending 3...Qxf4, is considered dubious. Also dubious are theKeeneDefense: 2...Qh4+ 3.g3 Qe7 and theMafiaDefense: 1.e4 e5 2.f4 c5.[45]
2...f5?!is among the oldest countergambits in KGD, known from a game published in 1625 byGioachino Greco.[46]Vincenz Hrubyalso played it againstMikhail Chigorinin 1882.[47]It is nonetheless considered dubious because 3.exf5 with the threat of Qh5+ gives White a good game. The variation is sometimes named the Pantelidakis Countergambit because GMLarry Evansanswered a question from Peter Pantelidakis of Chicago about it in one of his columns inChess Life and Review.
In several lines of theVienna GameWhite offers a sort of delayed King's Gambit. In theVienna Gambit(1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.f4), Black should reply 3...d5, since 3....exf4?!4.e5 forces the knight to retreat. 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.f4 exf4 may lead to theHamppe–Muzio Gambitafter 4.Nf3 g5 5.Bc4 g4 6.0-0 gxf3 7.Qxf3, or to theSteinitz Gambitafter 4.d4 Qh4+ 5.Ke2. Both of these lines may be reached via the King's Gambit proper, but the Vienna move order is more common.
White may also offer the gambit in theBishop's Opening, e.g. 1.e4 e5 2.Bc4 Nc6 3.f4, though this is uncommon.
TheEncyclopaedia of Chess Openingshas ten codes for the King's Gambit, C30 through C39.

---

